# Operative ekphrasis: the collapse of the text/image distinction in multimodal {AI
# Source: Bajohr - 2024 - Operative ekphrasis the collapse of the textimage distinction in multimodal AI.pdf
# BibTeX key: bajohr_operative_2024
# Zotero dir: 3128
# Extracted chars: 75573
# Format: PDF
============================================================

── PAGE 1 ──
See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/380812173
Operative ekphrasis: the collapse of the text/image distinction in multimodal AI
Article  in  Word & Image · June 2024
DOI: 10.1080/02666286.2024.2330335
CITATIONS
11
READS
260
1 author:
Hannes Bajohr
University of California, Berkeley
125 PUBLICATIONS   268 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Hannes Bajohr on 28 June 2024.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.


── PAGE 2 ──
Operative ekphrasis: the collapse of the text/image
distinction in multimodal AI
HANNES BAJOHR
Abstract
This article discusses the implications of multimodal artificial intelligence (AI), including image generators such as
DALL!E, for the traditional concept of ekphrasis. Using ekphrasis as an example of ‘thinking with AI’, it takes up the suggestion
that in the digital realm ekphrastic relationships should be understood as performative rather than representational. Since with the
introduction of modern AI the digital realm needs to be divided into a sequential part (classic algorithms) and a connectionist part
(artificial neural networks), the article shows how the latter part ultimately tends toward a collapse of the text/image distinction in
the technical system. Artificial neural networks both encode images and text as the same type of information, and they do so differ-
ently from the sequential model. Only in the context of multimodal AI, unlike in analogue or sequential paradigms, ekphrasis goes
beyond the separation of or transition between text and image, but rather transcends this difference.
Keywords
ekphrasis; artificial intelligence; visual poetry; Critical AI Studies
The burgeoning field of Critical AI Studies brings the
perspective of the humanities to the ever-accelerating develop-
ment of what is, broadly and inaccurately, called ‘artificial
intelligence’ (AI).1 As Rita Raley and Jennifer Rhee point out,
it wilfully takes up the contested moniker of AI—which is
often more of a marketing term than a technical description,
for which ‘machine learning’ (ML) would be more apt—and
treats it metonymically for a whole socio-economic culture of
technology, thus ‘engaging AI as an assemblage of techno-
logical arrangements and sociotechnical practices, as concept,
ideology, and dispositif’.2 In its most influential variety, Critical
AI Studies responds to the fact that AI in the shape of stochas-
tic (probability-based) ML has become a core element of the
global flow of capital and its extractive tendencies as well as a
central technology of surveillance and racial and economic
exclusion, which is why this field is concerned with the polit-
ical, economic, and ethical ramifications of these technolo-
gies.3 An equally important part of Critical AI Studies is
devoted
to
dissecting
the
conceptual
and
philosophical
assumptions that underlie the design and use of ML applica-
tions, which still more often than not treat their ‘data’ as
objective and neutral representations of the world.4 If, as
Philip Agre put it already thirty years ago, ‘AI is philosophy
underneath,’5 critical work is needed to make explicit what is
most often only implicit in actually existing AI systems. Often,
this means, to quote German philosopher Hans Blumenberg,
‘to destroy what is supposedly “natural” and convict it of its
“artificiality”’6—for AI is often not considered artificial enough.
It is in this very crucible that the humanities, equipped with
their critical, historical, and conceptual awareness, find their
relevance magnified. As Fabian Offert and Thao Phan put it,
‘current-generation machine learning models require current-
generation modes of (humanist) critique’.7
But this relationship between AI and the humanities goes
both ways: if AI already is philosophy not yet articulated, we
can also turn Agre’s adage around—as humanists, we would
be remiss if we did not also test our own concepts against the
new phenomena that computer science and engineering
throw at us. Consequently, humanistic practices must evolve
to grapple with the questions incited by ML technology, and
not only think about, and often against, but sometimes also
with AI. This does not mean dropping the critical stance but
rather extending it to both sides of the equation, and includ-
ing humanistic concepts as an object of inquiry and potential
revision in light of the questions raised by Critical AI Studies.
In this paper, I demonstrate one example of such ‘thinking
with AI’ by shining a new light on an age-old question of
humanist inquiry, and one animating this journal—the rela-
tionship between word and image.
In what follows, I will develop some intuitions about this
relationship, and ask how it may be changing with the shift
from classical algorithms to current state-of-the-art ML. In
particular, I am interested in so-called ‘multimodal AI’,
among which large visual models such as DALL!E or stable
diffusion may be the best known. To think with AI here is to
test this technology’s theoretical ramifications for a more trad-
itional concept pertaining to the interaction of word and
image, namely ekphrasis, which I broaden here to include the
technical substrate of this interaction in the digital under the
title ‘operative ekphrasis’. Using this concept, I show that
multimodal AI does away with the separation of mediums
that is at the core of ekphrasis, as this technology can process
both text and image as one type of data. In so doing, I use AI
as what Daniel Dennett calls an ‘intuition pump’8—a tool
that allows us to clarify conceptual implications otherwise
unseen.
WORD & IMAGE, VOL. 40, NO. 2, 2024
77
https://doi.org/10.1080/02666286.2024.2330335
# 2024 The Author(s). Published with license by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. The terms on which this article has been published allow the posting of the Accepted Manuscript in a repository by the author(s)
or with their consent.


── PAGE 3 ──
In the first part of this article, I use examples from visual
poetry to discuss three text/image media: (1) analogue, (2)
‘sequentially’
digital
(classic
computing)
and
(3)
‘connectionistically’ digital (stochastic ML). I will argue that
with the advent of ML, the division between digital and ana-
logue media needs to be subdivided, as AI operates differently
from older computational paradigms. In the second part, I
discuss how the rhetorical figure of ekphrasis provides a
framework for ordering this new subdivision by interpreting
code as performative. Finally, I draw two conclusions: first,
that the classical opposition between text and image, on which
the concept of ekphrasis is based, dissolves in multimodal AI;
and second, that semantics nevertheless returns to the digital,
which hitherto has been seen only as a matter of syntax.
Taken together, these claims question both our aesthetic lexi-
con and our understanding of digitality. As such, they under-
score the cross-disciplinary significance of Critical AI Studies,
and show that the humanities, with the necessary care and
without falling for hype and exaggeration, can benefit from
thinking with AI.
Text and image in the digital
As good a way as any to start discussing the relationship
between text and image is to turn to visual poetry, which by
its very nature brings visuality and textuality into dialogue.
Figure 1 shows a work by German concrete poet Franz Mon.
It is taken from his cycle ‘non tot’ published in 1964, and it
consists of several typewritten lines shaped like a diamond, or
perhaps a sail. The lines of the upper half repeat the word
‘non’, those in the bottom half the word ‘tot’. The lines grow
progressively more compressed toward the centre of the page,
partly obscuring one another. Figure 2 shows a visual poem
by the contemporary German digital author Jasmin Meerhoff,
taken from her 2022 collection ‘They Lay’. Here, scraps of
typeset text are arranged in a repetitive, undulating pattern
that might suggest flames rising from some unseen fuel. What
these letters spell is difficult to decipher—they are certainly
letters, but in their collage-like configuration, they are even
more divorced from linguistic meaning than Mon’s already
enigmatic ‘non/tot’. To the uninitiated viewer, in any case,
the two pieces speak a shared poetic language that brings
together letters in constellations in which the visual quality of
the page rivals or surpasses the poems’ semantic meaning.
These poems are to be looked at as images as much (if not
more than) they are meant to be read as lines of text. Viewed
next to each other, it seems that not much has changed in the
roughly sixty years separating these two works.
Compare this with the piece shown in figure 3. It is the
work of Dave Orr and, like Meerhoff’s, it was created in
2022. Unlike the first two poems, however, it appears to be of
a quite different make. Its centred text alignment gives it the
air of a more traditional, or even naïve, poetic paradigm that
predates the visual poetry of the other two pieces. Yet a
second look reveals that while the title is clearly legible, if
Figure
1. Franz
Mon,
‘non/tot
III’;
from
Lesebuch
(Neuwied:
Luchterhand, 1964), 38. # 2024, ProLitteris, Zurich.
Figure 2. Jasmin Meerhoff, ‘They Lay’, 2022. Digital. nervousdata.com.
Courtesy: Jasmin Meerhoff.
78
HANNES BAJOHR


── PAGE 4 ──
enigmatic—‘Stiny Snity Grify’—the lines are in fact not sim-
ply nonsense; they are not even text. They have the character
of what is often called ‘asemic’ writing, that is, writing that
does not use words but merely the semblance of words. If, as
Peter Schwenger puts it, the ‘visual and muscular aspects of
writing are generally obscured by the primacy of writing’s
communicative function’, then an asemic text ‘does not
attempt to communicate any message other than its own
nature as writing’,9 including its visual character. In this sense,
Orr’s poem, too, could be classified as ‘visual’, albeit from a
divergent perspective compared with the other two—instead
of making a poem by using text to create an image, it uses an
image to create a poem that looks like text.
As instances of visual poetry, commonalities between the
three works can be identified. What interests me here, how-
ever, is what sets them apart—and this is in no small part
their technical substrate, their, as Katherine Hayles calls it,
‘media-specificity’.10 For all three use radically different tech-
nologies, and all these technologies imply radically different
relationships between text and image.
Perhaps unsurprisingly, the two examples from 2022 use
digital technology, while Mon’s 1964 work was created by
analogue means—with an Olympia Monica mechanical type-
writer, to be exact, on which he produced much of his con-
crete and visual poetry. Figure 4 shows a section from the
Monica’s manual with a sample of its signature typeface. In
contrast, Jasmin Meerhoff created her poem digitally, by writ-
ing a MacOS shell script (figure 5). When executed in the
command line, the script tells the open-source application
Imagemagick to do two things: first, to cut a single image file
containing a line of text from a scanned page into small pieces
(lines 12–20 in the script); and second, to collage those pieces
into the shape that makes up the poem (lines 23–27). The
wavy appearance is the result of using a sine function to
arrange the pieces by specifying the amplitude and frequency
of the waves (line 4). This is all done automatically, and
Meerhoff’s script is freely available online,11 enabling anyone
to make a potentially endless stream of visual poems.
Dave Orr’s piece is also produced by digital means, but in
a very different way. It was created using an ‘artificial intelli-
gence’, or more precisely, a complex ML algorithm that is
implemented as a neural network. The neural network in this
case is called DALL!E, a product by the company OpenAI,
best
known
for
its
text-generation
model
ChatGPT.12
DALL!E, currently in its third version, is a large visual model
with a text-to-image capability, and it is only one among a
growing number of them,
such as
StabilityAI’s
Stable
Diffusion, Google’s Imagen, or Midjourney.13 These systems
take a natural language description (the ‘prompt’) as an input
and generate an image as an output, producing a visual repre-
sentation of the content of the text. In the case of DALL!E 2—
which was used to produce Orr’s poem—this is done via an
interface that consists of a single text box for the input prompt
(figure 6).14 For Orr’s poem, the prompt was ‘a poem about
the singularity written in a serif font’.15
It is worth noting that DALL!E typically does not generate
texts. This ‘poem’ emerged when Orr was examining the
model, and it appeared as part of a blog post about the sys-
tem. As far as I am aware, it was never meant to be published
as a literary work, and the fact that Orr is Google
DeepMind’s director of engineering and does not, to my
knowledge, consider himself a poet supports this impression.
Indeed, AI image generation is famously bad at producing
text, and next to mangled hands, garbled writing is (or was
until recently) the most prominent tell-tale sign that a picture
is in fact AI generated.16 What DALL!E is usually meant to
produce are images—either photorealistic or stylized—all of
which have in common that they are the result of an input
text. Figure 7 shows a more typical example from the devel-
oper’s website. The prompt ‘An astronaut riding a horse in
photorealistic style’ results in an image of just that. As there is
nothing but the textual prompt for users to steer the image
generation, a veritable ‘promptology’ has established itself
since the popularization of large visual models. By finessing
the input text, adding more descriptions of style or atmos-
phere, it is possible to nudge the result in one direction or
another. Apart from a Prompt Book,17 there is now even a web-
site on which particularly useful prompts are sold for small
sums.18
The three discussed works each embody different poetic
and technological paradigms, which can be categorized in
Figure 3. Dave Orr, ‘Stiny Snity Grify’, 2022. Digital. lesswrong.com.
Courtesy: Dave Orr.
WORD & IMAGE
79


── PAGE 5 ──
several different ways: first, as a type of text/image interaction
in the broader genre of visual poetry; and second as the result
of analogue (Mon) or digital technology (Meerhoff, Orr).
However, it is possible to break down the digital technology
into two subcategories: third, classical algorithms and modern
AI, which I will discuss below under the rubric of sequential
and connectionist paradigms respectively. For now, it is suffi-
cient to note that the digital realm is not a monolith but
instead a landscape of varied subdomains.
All three classifications connect text with images or image-
like structures, but they do so in distinct ways. Visual poetry
does this by its very nature: it creates images through the
arrangement of text. However, only the two digital works do
so at the level of technical substrate. Here, the text and the
resulting text/image stand not simply in a mimetic relationship
(text that, once arranged, looks like an image) but in a causal
one (text that, as part of a transformative process, brings about
an image). This is what I call operative ekphrasis. But while in the
second case—the classic computer code—a purely syntactic
code language is responsible for the process of making an
image, only in the last case—the AI model—is there also a
semantic element; it is this element that ultimately threatens to
dissolve the distinction between text and image altogether.
The remainder of this article will be spent unpacking these
claims. They bear significant implications for how we interpret
and understand these works and their differences, and it is an
example of what an aesthetics of AI could be that takes its
technical substrate seriously. To illustrate why, I need to eluci-
date to some degree how these technologies operate.
Sequential and connectionist paradigms of AI
For the subdivision of digital technology, I have proposed the
terms
‘sequential’
and
‘connectionist’.19
The
sequential
paradigm denotes the dominant style of operating computers
since Alan Turing’s (conceptual) invention of the Universal
Machine in 1936 and, after earlier models had been built,
John von Neumann’s (actual) implementation of the ‘stored
program’ concept in the EDVAC (electronic discrete variable
automatic computer) architecture in 1945 (built in 1949)20
that by and large is still used today. It is characterized by the
classical algorithm, laid down in a programming language of
sequentially executed steps. Meerhoff’s cut-up script belongs
in this category, as do most of the programs on a typical com-
puter. For instance, the command ‘read -p’ in line 4 (figure 5)
requests a user input that will be stored in the variables ‘am’
and ‘fm’, which later designate the amplitude and the fre-
quency of the poem’s waves. Importantly, these lines are exe-
cuted one after another and in a deterministic manner. Every
time it is run, the program will go through the same, predict-
able commands. Because one can inspect the algorithm by
reading the explicitly stated rules, this paradigm has, in prin-
ciple, a high degree of transparency to human readers.
The sequential paradigm differs greatly from the newer
digital mode of operation that I call connectionist, which is
what is usually meant by AI today—deep learning, which is a
subset of stochastic ML methodologies that uses multilayered
artificial neural networks to model complex patterns in data.
Loosely inspired by the way individual neurons in the brain
repeatedly forge paths to perform higher level functions, cur-
rent deep neural networks are made up of interconnected
units, often referred to as ‘neurons’, which are linked by
‘synapses’. (It is important to note, however, that this is a
highly idealized affair and should not be confused with actual
brain structure.) In these computational models, each neuron
receives and processes incoming data, calculates a weighted
sum based on its input, and then typically applies a non-linear
Figure 4. Excerpt from the Olympia Monica’s manual (model SM7).
80
HANNES BAJOHR


── PAGE 6 ──
activation function to determine its output in a process called
‘forward propagation’. The discrepancy between this output
and the desired or known correct data is then measured using
a loss function. Subsequently, an optimization algorithm—
typically a variant of ‘gradient descent’—is used to adjust the
weights and biases across the network to minimize this loss, a
process known as ‘backpropagation’. The primary aim of
training a deep neural network is to refine these parameters
so that the model can generalize effectively, extrapolating
from the training dataset to predict outcomes or classify new
instances accurately. Put differently, the network identifies
underlying patterns in the training set, fits a mathematical
function to these data points, which then serves as a model for
interpreting unseen data.21
Figure 5. The shell script for Jasmin Meerhoff’s ‘They Lay’.
Figure 6. The interface of DALL!E with a text box for inputting the
prompt.
WORD & IMAGE
81


── PAGE 7 ──
Consider a practical example involving image generation.
Given a large enough dataset of human faces, a neural net-
work can process this dataset to learn its inherent patterns,
structures, and variations. These learned characteristics can
then be applied to generate entirely new images of faces,
which, despite being completely novel, will appear strikingly
similar to real human faces. Because of the statistical nature
of the AI, these faces are neither collages of face parts, nor
mere linear composites of all the faces known to the model.
Rather, and metaphorically speaking, the network learns face-
ness, the Gestalt of faces, and is able to recreate it in a way that
does not repeat the individual inputs.22 This is the principle
of the well-known website thispersondoesnotexist.com, which
presents a completely new and unique but artificial portrait of
a face every time it is refreshed.
The AI model resulting from this training process imple-
ments complex nonlinear functions. What is central, now, is
that a neural network cannot be translated back into a deter-
ministic and exact higher level algorithm, as the model merely
describes the connection strengths between the ‘neurons’ in
the so-called weight model. While of course neural networks
are still implemented in a von Neumann machine—and not,
say, in an analogue or quantum computer—and are thus still
digital, they nevertheless follow a radically different concep-
tual framework than the sequential model. For unlike the
sequential paradigm, whose logic is laid out step by step, the
connectionist paradigm follows a stochastic rather than a
purely deterministic logic—in other words, the learned
‘knowledge’ is embedded in the network’s structure and its
weights, which represent the strength of connections between
the artificial neurons. As a result, while it is technically pos-
sible to ‘read’ the values of the weights in a trained neural net-
work, these numbers do not translate into a sequence of
comprehensible instructions or steps in the same way that
traditional code in a programming language does.23
Evidently, these are two very different models of computa-
tion that we nevertheless call ‘digital’. Meerhoff’s work, pro-
duced by a classical algorithm, was an example of the
sequential, Orr’s ‘poem’, produced by a neural net, of the
connectionist paradigm. This technical introduction matters.
For this nested distinction—that between analogue and
digital, and that, within the digital, between the sequential
and the connectionist paradigm—generates different relation-
ships between text and image. What characterizes both digital
forms, but not the analogue one, is what I want to call opera-
tive ekphrasis.
Representational and performative notions of
ekphrasis
The concept of ekphrasis is one of the most-discussed terms in
visual theory, literary criticism, and classics for describing the
relationship between text and image. It has, as Ruth Webb
noted, become a theoretical genre unto itself, evoking ‘a net-
work of interlocking questions and interests, from the positivist
pursuit of lost monuments described in ancient and medieval
ekphrasis to the poststructuralist fascination with a textual
fragment which declares itself to be pure artifice, the represen-
tation of representation’.24 But it has repeatedly been pointed
out that in its original meaning, ekphrasis was a much
broader category and signified a rhetorical device for generat-
ing vivid, sensory descriptions in oratory. A word from the
rhetor’s education, it was used to describe the act of clearly
conjuring up something in the mind’s eye of the audience—of
transforming them, as Nikolaos of Myra put it in the second
century CE, from listeners to spectators.25
This early meaning already implies a media anthropology
in which the auditory and visual senses become functionally
interchangeable. The ancient use did not particularly attend
to the description of visual artworks, as Webb stresses.26 It
was only later, in the nineteenth and most emphatically in the
twentieth century, that the term ‘ekphrasis’ became restricted
to literary representations of a real or, in the case of what John
Hollander has later called ‘notional ekphrasis’, an imaginary
work of art.27 Nevertheless, both interpretations persist in dif-
ferent guises to this day, so that, sampling the past five deca-
des,
definitions
of
ekphrasis
have
ranged
from
‘any
description of anything visual’28 to, more specifically, ‘the
poetic description of a pictorial or sculptural work of art’.29
Staying with the broader and, I think, more philosophically
generative definition, it makes sense that James Heffernan has
Figure 7. A DALL!E-generated image for the prompt ‘An astronaut rid-
ing a horse in photorealistic style’.
82
HANNES BAJOHR


── PAGE 8 ──
emphasized the representational quality of ekphrasis by defining
it as ‘the verbal representation of visual representation’.30
Tamar Yacobi has underscored this view by suggesting that
ekphrasis is ‘representation in the second degree’ by specifying
representation as repetition in a different mode: ‘What was
originally an autonomous image of the world becomes in
ekphrastic transfer an image of an image, a part of a new
whole, a visual inset within a verbal frame’.31 We can see here
already that this characterization, and the rhetoric of inset
and frame, point to the tension at the core of ekphrasis: the
concept articulates either an equivalence of or a competition
between language and image—one imitating the other is
either a successful enterprise or the recipe for disappointment.
Thus, as W. J. T. Mitchell has noted, ekphrasis can be part of
a hopeful or a fearful ontology of text/image interaction. It is
either something with an almost utopian potential for trans-
formation—from the visual to the verbal and back again, as
the ancients had it—or a most blatant impossibility, which
therefore needs to be prohibited aesthetically: making the vis-
ual absolutely verbal can never actually happen, and in fact it
must not.32 Lessing’s Laoco€on33 argued for the incompatibility
of language’s temporal structure (ideal for depicting action)
with painting’s spatial makeup (best suited for depicting
objects) and is, to Mitchell, the ‘classic expression of ekphras-
tic fear’.34
This analysis of the immanent characteristics of the
mediums involved in the metaphor of ‘painting with words’
(Horace) entails a critique of mimetic representation as the
defining linchpin of ekphrasis. It has been taken up again in
the last decade, and the focus on representation is replaced by
a focus on performance: what is it that ekphrasis does, without
saying that this doing must be imitative? Renate Brosch has
thus suggested a new definition: ‘ekphrasis is a literary
response to a visual image [ … ] emphasizing the performative
instead of the mimetic’.35 This performative interpretation of
ekphrasis has several advantages, the main one being that by
passing over its mimetic dimension, one can suspend the deci-
sion about its hopeful or fearful interpretation. Instead of
understanding it as either an equivalence of or a competition
between art forms—as a successful or unsuccessful relation-
ship of representation—it simply places them in a consecutive
and causal relation.
My reason for discussing visual poetry, which is not in the
traditional, representational sense ekphrastic, is that it never-
theless can be understood as a performative ekphrasis: it is
text ‘doing’ image. But beyond that, I would like to extend
this notion by mobilizing the performative definition of
ekphrasis for digital media in general. With a different
emphasis, Brosch also brings ekphrasis to the digital, arguing
that it becomes important in a digital media ecology that is
inundated with images while also drowning in text—contra-
dicting such doomsday predictions that saw the demise of
reading. However, I will tweak her use of the word
‘performative’ to talk about ekphrasis in its media-specificity
in the digital. Instead of literary ‘responses’, which are not
themselves digital events, I want to understand the perform-
ance of ekphrasis as a computational operation that correlates text and
image.
Operative ekphrasis
With the performative notion of ekphrasis in mind, let me
return to the three visual poems, the division between ana-
logue and digital, and the subdivision between sequential and
connectionist. All three works embody specific ways of using
language to create an image. In this sense, they are all
ekphrastic in their cumulative effect: producing visual constel-
lations through text. That alone, however, is not yet what I
call operative ekphrasis. It is only really possible for text
actively and causally to bring forth an image in the digital
works, not in the analogue one.
In the analogue—in Mon’s typewriter poem—the text may
of course ‘produce’ an image. Yet this production is not per-
formative on the operative level, but rather a perceptual after-
effect of a manual arrangement. In ‘non/tot’, it is the writer’s
bodily actions—his hand movements on the typewriter, his
exerting force onto the keys—that lead to what we are com-
pelled to describe as the ‘image’ of the text. This visual struc-
ture is the result of work, that is, a causal chain of mechanical
forces that are not themselves textual. There is only one text
here, the one on the page; it does not, strictly speaking, per-
form anything.
This is different in the digital works. In Meerhoff’s piece,
there are now two texts—the one on the page and the one
that actually produces that text, the code. This is a textual
performance in a computational sense: an operation the first text
carries out to produce the second text effectively. It does so
not as mechanical work, as in Mon, but as the manipulation
of information, which is itself textual in nature. This is not a
new insight, of course, and scholars like Espen Aarseth have
built entire theories around this duality of text,36 while
Katherine Hayles has argued that ‘electronic text is more pro-
cessual than print, it is performative by its very nature’.37 It is
precisely this performativity of the interplay between the first
text—the code—and the second text—the final constellation-
image—that I call operative ekphrasis. It means understand-
ing ekphrasis not as representation but as performance; not as
imitating an image through text, but as text effectively bring-
ing about an image. As such, it is truly ‘words painting a pic-
ture’—but
as
an
operation
of
manipulating
symbolic
information rather than figurative representation.38
Two remarks are necessary here that address possible
objections to this notion of operative ekphrasis. First, it is easy
to note that what is ‘painted’ here is not in fact a text image.
WORD & IMAGE
83


── PAGE 9 ──
Meerhoff’s work may use text (the code) to create an image
composed of text (the work), but technically, the result is an
image file, not a text file. Its content, once put up on a com-
puter screen, only registers as text for humans, but not for
machines. It is a bitmap image, a grid of pixels with different
colour values, and as such it is human-readable but not
machine-readable. Without a process of optical character rec-
ognition, the computer would not even register it as text.
The response to this objection is to note that the image,
too, is, on a lower level, constituted textually: for image files
are encoded alphanumerically. It is only through the transla-
tion of this text into the pixel matrix of a screen by means of a
codec that it actually becomes an image.39 This argument
was levelled for describing digital ekphrasis as early as 1996,
when media theorist Jay David Bolter declared that if the
tradition of text/image interaction had been predicated both
on the superiority of the word to the image as well as a meta-
physics of presence that hoped to get to the thing itself
through immersive description, the computer age reverses the
first aspect while retaining the second. In multimedia environ-
ments, images take the lead, as their ideal is absolute transpar-
ency, and the immersion of virtual reality that amounts to a
‘denial of ekphrasis’.40 Yet a complete elimination of text,
Bolter wrote, was oblivious to the fact that even ‘virtual reality
systems rest on layer after layer of writing, of arbitrary signs
in the form of computer programs’.41
The digital condition, then, as one could paraphrase
Jerome McGann’s work, is the textual condition.42 In the
digital, everything is text, and every image is always only
image-for-us. Even in the sequential model, the distinction
between image and text is dissolved by making text virtually
the only mode of existence for digital objects.43 It thus still
makes sense to speak of operative ekphrasis here, except that
now there are three texts involved—the code, the (alphanu-
merically encoded) image file, and the text-as-image as it
appears to a human reader. The performative aspect remains
the same: text does something that is ultimately an image—
which is now augmented by the effect of a secondary semiosis
that takes place not in the machine but in humans.
The second objection regards the relationship between the
concepts of ‘text’ and ‘language’. It seems to have an
extremely limited scope: I have used the term ‘text’ to speak
of the elements in Mon’s piece, of Meerhoff’s code, and finally
of the data in the image file. These are all very different kinds
of text but none of them is language in the full meaning of the
word, which not only has a syntax, but also a semantics and a
pragmatics. Still, the debate as to whether code can claim to
be a language in the proper sense is complex. For some, such
as Loss Peque~no Glazier, there is practically no difference
between the two.44 Code, in this view, can thus equally be a
poetic medium, a means of expression. For others, however,
any meaning such code carries for us is simply ‘parasitic’ on
the meanings we associate with it, as Stevan Harnad famously
argued, and which has recently been reemphasized in the dis-
cussion about the AI systems’ ability to produce meaning (a
point to which I return in a later section).45
For the latter group, the artificial language of the script,
then, is not really a proper language at all. Florian Cramer
echoes Harnad when he calls programming codes ‘syntactical
languages as opposed to semantic languages’. As the name
suggests, syntactical languages are utterly devoid of meaning,
unlike natural, that is, semantic languages. Cramer explains:
The symbols of computer control languages inevitably do
have semantic connotations simply because there exist no
symbols with which humans would not associate some
meaning. But symbols can’t denote any semantic statements,
that is, they do not express meaning in their own terms.46
Insofar as pragmatics is tied to meaning-effects, this also
means that code is performative only in a technical sense—as
a series of commands that are executed according to prede-
fined rules. None of these commands in themselves carries
meaning, be it understood as reference to the outside world or
a system of signs within the context of communication. Code
is syntax without semantics; and it has a pragmatics only in
the abstract sense of its command structure.47
I am willing to admit all this. In fact, this is my point mov-
ing on. For in the internal differentiation within the digital,
this limited notion of text as well as the relationship of lan-
guage to image begins to change once we turn from the
sequential to the connectionist paradigm. In neural networks,
there is no ‘first text’ as there was in Meerhoff’s ‘They Lay’,
no code that is written as a series of rule steps we could
inspect and which, when executed, would perform com-
mands. Instead, seed data is passed through the network of
connections; it is either increased or decreased at each stage,
depending on the trained weights. Finally, the results are out-
put at the end layer of neurons, and summed together to pro-
duce a single output. This is the basic process by which neural
networks generate predictions from input data. The output,
then, is the result of a cumulative, statistical, and parallel pro-
cess that takes place between the many connections of the net-
work, but which cannot in any plausible way be thought of as
command-like.
However, this leads to the curious conclusion that com-
pared with the sequential paradigm—the classical algorithm,
which is devoid of semantics—the connectionist paradigm has
no discernible command-structure and therefore no prag-
matics. Paradoxically, however, semantics returns in multi-
modal AI such as DALL!E. And it does so by collapsing the
image/text distinction on a deeper level than did the reduc-
tion of image data to text in the sequential model.
84
HANNES BAJOHR


── PAGE 10 ──
I will spend the final part of this article following this chias-
mus at the heart of the sequential/connectionist distinction. A
first hint that meaning-oriented language plays a role here
was given by the input text: after all, the whole point of
DALL!E is that it can turn a natural language prompt—a
meaningful linguistic description—into an image-file. This,
too, is a ‘painting with words’, again, not as representation
but as performance. DALL!E must thus also reasonably be
called a type of operative ekphrasis: it acts as a text that com-
putationally produces an image. But this coordination of text
and image can only happen by undoing the distinction
between them, and not through code but through something
that may be called ‘artificial semantics’. To understand this,
we must again think with AI.
Artificial semantics
Multimodal AI is the name given to a new class of neural net-
works. The distinguishing feature of these models lies in their
ability to integrate multiple data types, such as images, text,
speech, tactile or location data, and more, to increase their per-
formance.48 A distinction can be made between multimodal AIs
in which the input and output are of different modalities and
those in which the inputs or outputs themselves are multi-
modal.49 While DALL!E and other text-to-image models belong
to the first type and primarily focus on converting one modality
into another—text into image—multimodal AIs of the second
type are designed to process different data types at once as
enriched information type. GPT-4, which generates text, is now
trained on multiple modalities to boost performance,50 and with
Gemini, Google introduced a large multimodal model that com-
bines image, audio, video, and text data from the outset, as does
OpenAI's newest system, GPT-4o.51 In both cases, what distin-
guishes these networks from older models is their ability to
correlate and process various types of data. Consequently, they
transcend the limitations of older neural network types that were
more specialized and medium-specific.
In the realm of neural networks, different ‘architectures’
have traditionally been tailored for specific tasks. Some excel
at handling temporal sequences, while others demonstrate
superior performance in processing spatial information. This
division parallels Lessing’s argument for the separation of the
arts, and indeed certain AIs prove better suited to process
text, others images. Previously, two fundamental architec-
tures, the recurrent neural net (RNN) and the convolutional
neural net (CNN), represented the core models in these
respective domains. CNNs excelled in generating images due
to their ability to handle two-dimensional matrices effectively,
while RNNs were more suitable for textual analysis, retaining
information from linearly ordered data.52 Hence, these net-
works were constrained by their association with a particular
medium and inherently unimodal.
For most users, this was the situation at least until January
2021 when OpenAI unveiled the inaugural, more compact,
version of DALL!E. This model could transform textual into
visual information. Rather than simply stitching an RNN and
a CNN together, however, it adopted a new approach: a sin-
gle architecture that handles both text and image, a truly
multimodal AI. While DALL!E and its successors DALL!E 2
(2022) and DALL!E 3 (2023) still consist of several individual
neural nets that work in tandem, they all utilize the same
architecture, called the Transformer, which excels at dealing
with condensed representations of images and text.53
It is worth unpacking the functionality of DALL!E, which
operates in a training and a generative (or inference) phase.
In the training phase, a transformer model called CLIP (con-
trastive language–image pre-training) is fed hundreds of mil-
lions of images and their associated captions taken from the
internet—for example, a photo of a cat with the caption ‘this
is a photo of a cat’. Using a technique called contrastive learn-
ing, it is then trained to produce a single shared embedding
space on which different modalities are mapped, so that
related images and texts are closer within this space. The
result is a very large model that correlates image information
to text information.
This correlation of image and text information is crucial in
the training of DALL!E. It learns from the embedding space
established by CLIP, and builds upon it to create its own
internal model called a ‘prior’. This ‘prior’ captures the statis-
tical properties of the high-level features in the data and forms
a kind of scaffold that the generative process uses to produce
outputs. The central point here is that image and text infor-
mation are not stored separately; once correlated by CLIP,
they become part of the same, shared representation space
used by DALL!E, and are stored as one type of data.
The second step in DALL!E’s operation is the generative
phase, in which a separate model called GLIDE (guided lan-
guage to image diffusion for generation and editing) is acti-
vated. GLIDE leverages the stored correlation data between
text and images in the CLIP model to execute a reverse oper-
ation: rather than matching an image with corresponding
text, it synthesizes an image that best aligns with the provided
text prompt, and it does so through a process called
‘diffusion’.54 What is important here is that GLIDE uses
CLIP’s representation space to manifest text prompts into
their most probable image counterparts. Thus, when pre-
sented with a prompt like ‘an astronaut riding a horse in
photorealistic style’, DALL!E, through this collaborative
model interplay, is able to output an image of an astronaut
astride a horse, rendered in photorealistic detail. This ability
hinges on the initial learning from the CLIP model about the
visual
characteristics
of
‘astronauts’,
‘horses’,
and
‘photorealistic style’, and the generative power of GLIDE to
synthesize these concepts into a novel visual composition. It is
WORD & IMAGE
85


── PAGE 11 ──
in this way that the prompt ‘a poem about the singularity
written in a serif font’ resulted in Dave Orr’s poem. Because
DALL!E is stochastic, and because it is meant to output
images rather than texts, the result is blurry and asemic, but it
clearly has the Gestalt of a poem. What is central in this whole
operation is that the model, as one interpreter puts it, ‘learns
the semantic link between text descriptions of objects and their
corresponding visual manifestations’.55 CLIP stores linguistic
and pictorial information in the same representation space—
meaning is meaning regardless of its medium.
To speak of ‘meaning’ here—be it understood as reference
to the world or the communicative intent of speakers—may
come as a surprise. After all, semantics was the absent dimen-
sion of the sequential paradigm, of classic code as a purely syn-
tactical language not grounded in any connection to reality. Yet
precisely because the connectionist paradigm in the shape of
multimodal models correlates with different types of data, it
might also be a contender for a limited, a ‘dumb’ kind of mean-
ing.56 This is borne out by the fact that multimodal models
sometimes appear to form single ‘neurons’ for concepts inde-
pendent of whether the input is visual or verbal, paralleling
what have been hypothesized as ‘grandmother cells’ in neurosci-
ence since at least since the nineteen sixties.57 This concept
arose in response to the question of how exactly knowledge is
stored in the brain. When I see a picture of my grandmother, is
this recognition the result of a complex interaction of brain
regions? Or is there one specific neuron firing, a grandmother
cell? In 2005, a neuroscience study suggested that such neurons
may indeed exist. When subjects were shown images of popular
actor Halle Berry, a highly localized neural activity was
observed in the medial temporal lobe. Moreover, this activity
occurred not only when subjects saw a photo of Berry but also
when they saw a drawing of her and even the string of letters
spelling out ‘Halle Berry’. This led the authors to suggest that
the brain may use an ‘invariant, sparse and explicit code’ that
processes ‘an abstract representation of the identity of the indi-
vidual or object shown’.58 In other words, the brain may
encode concepts directly, in a multimodal fashion.
A similar phenomenon was found in the ‘neurons’ of CLIP,
the model in DALL!E that coordinates text and image. In
2021, OpenAI researchers published a paper suggesting that
the later layers of a fully trained CLIP network also show
something like a grandmother cell responding to individual
faces. There is a neuron—the paper uses Spiderman rather
than Halle Berry—that also responds to photos, drawings,
and text that refer to the same entity. A picture of Spiderman
and a string of text with his name will both activate the same
neuron, as does a picture of a spider, indicating that these
conceptual neurons are clustered semantically.59
To be clear: the notion of grandmother neurons is very
much contested—in neuroscience, this interpretation is con-
troversial, and in general the claim of some kind of homology
between actual brain tissue and neural networks is at best an
oversimplification.60 In reality, things are messier, as the
authors of the CLIP paper readily point out. Despite these
caveats, however, the notion of grandmother neurons—and
that of the shared representation space of text and image—
seems useful for highlighting a general tendency of multi-
modal AI. When it comes to its theoretical consequences, and
in particular to the consequences for the relationship between
text and image, we can, in the spirit of thinking with AI,
already draw some conclusions even if the empirical data is
incomplete and still in need of discussion.
If DALL!E, of which CLIP is a part, thus encodes text and
image in the same neurons or in the same representation
space, two things seem to follow.
First, unlike the sequential model, in which code was a
purely syntactic system with a limited pragmatics and no
semantic value, in multimodal AI, semantics comes back into
play. I do not want to say that this is semantics in the full
sense—be it the ‘communicative intent’ of human communi-
cation that linguistics explores,61 or the ‘being-in-a-situation’
that the Heidegger-inspired AI critique of Hubert Dreyfus sets
up as the limiting condition for truly intelligent agents.62 But
it seems clear that by correlating text and image within a sin-
gle computational system in multimodal AI, the difference
between the sequential and the connectionist paradigm of dig-
itality shows itself most clearly. For one can make the argu-
ment that neural networks, and multimodal models in
particular, may indeed be concerned with something that
may not be meaning in the full sense of human communica-
tion, but cannot be confidently labelled non-meaning either.
This ‘dumb’ meaning is what I call artificial semantics and it
is what makes AI models such interesting artifacts: they not
only carry the external connotations we project on them, as
Cramer suggested, but also generate a certain type of inherent
meaning through the intricate correlation of text and image
within a single system.
From this follows a second point. The effect of multimodal
AI is to collapse the distinction between text and image. Both
are not only correlated in the training process but, on the sys-
tem level, surpassed—not bound to either text or image repre-
sentations, but a shared third.63 Put conceptually, multimodal
AI suggests a new position in the tradition and ontology of
ekphrasis I described earlier. No longer the text/image inter-
action that underlies all its traditional theories, be they repre-
sentative or performative, multimodal AI’s formulation of
ekphrasis suggests a structural identity between text and image
on a higher level, relieving them of their primary semantic
function. There is now, as one could call it with Liliane
Louvel, a ‘multimodal pictorial third’64—the shared meaning
in the artificial neuron—that acts as locus of semantics
beyond word and image. This flies in the face of the ekphras-
tic fear of the formalist tradition from Lessing to Clement
86
HANNES BAJOHR


── PAGE 12 ──
Greenberg that advocated for the separation of mediums, but
it also explodes the ekphrastic hope of the lineage starting
with Horace, based on the genre’s productive transformation.
Here, thinking with AI has yielded a genuinely new position,
and large visual models such as DALL!E figure as its technical
implementation.
Finally, a third point. As I have indicated, the status of lan-
guage changes between the sequential and the connectionist
paradigms. Jasmin Meerhoff’s and David Orr’s works each
represent one of these paradigms, and each constitutes a type
of operative ekphrasis—a text that produces an image. But
whereas in the sequential case there is a ‘pragmatics’ without
semantics, in the connectionist case we have a ‘semantics’
without pragmatics. In the first instance, it is the code that
‘acts’ without carrying meaning beyond its mere symbolic
valence within a system of operations; in the other, it is the
weight model that ‘means’ without carrying out anything that
resembles a speech act. The performative here stands at the
beginning of the operational chain, in formulating the
prompt. Thus, Orr’s poem really means what it shows—on a
technical, fully non-intentional level—in a way that Meerhoff’s
does not: it encodes the description of itself within itself, high-
lighting once more that AI images are indeed something
entirely different from classic code-generated works.
Conclusion
I have collected here some ideas about the relationship
between text and image in the digital, and I have suggested
that with the advent of stochastic ML in the form of artificial
neural networks, it is necessary to divide the digital realm into
sequential and connectionist subfields. Further, I have argued
that only in the digital realm can be found what one might
call operative ekphrasis: there, texts do not represent images,
but perform them by computationally effecting them. And
corresponding to the connectionist and sequential approaches,
there seem to be two distinct types of operative ekphrases,
involving two distinct notions of language—one emphasizing
a pragmatic, another a semantic dimension; both of which, to
reiterate, are very much below the full meaning of these
words, but with some reasonable connection to them never-
theless. However, against the orthodoxy of computers as only
having syntax without semantics, there is at least the possibil-
ity that multimodal AI, in its conceptual neurons, in fact enco-
des meaning—a type of artificial semantics that does not
mean to the full extent in which humans mean, but means
nonetheless.
The argument I have put forward, then, has both a con-
crete and a methodical dimension. On the one hand, it serves
as an aesthetic analysis of AI that takes into account the tech-
nical substrate of its media. What this amounts to is a case for
multimodality in discussing these works. It shows that ‘there
are no visual media’, as was said by Mitchell, for whom the
separation of mediums always ignores the entanglement of
the senses and the linguistic basis of their transmission.65 At
the same time, we have neither Lessing nor Horace to follow,
but something else that goes beyond these options. On the
other hand, however, this argument was also an example of
how Critical AI Studies might not only think about or against,
but also with AI. My proposed term, operative ekphrasis, was
in this case less meant to add a new dimension to an old and
venerable concept. Rather, it served as way of thinking about
a problem that puts it into a specific situation to see how it
fares; in this case, the problem to be studied was the connec-
tion of text and image, and the interaction between a tech-
nical metaphorics and its humanist use.
These are interesting times—on a technical level, progress
in AI is in hyperspeed, and a little more than four years ago,
computer-generated grammatically correct sentences were
remarkable in themselves; now mere descriptions generate
images. While we must not get caught up in the AI hype—
ascribing to machines characteristics like consciousness or its
builders the status of visionaries for whom the rules of fair
play no longer hold—we cannot ignore these developments
either. If, as pioneers of Critical AI Studies Jonathan Roberge
and Michael Castelle write, ML engineers ‘see their own
behavior in terms of the epistemology of their techniques’,66
then we as humanists may well check our cultural, philosoph-
ical, and aesthetic epistemology refracted in current media
technologies. Their categories may be slow to catch up with
the reality we see in the wild, and yet while scholarship can
observe them from a distance or get involved hands-on, it
must be open to adjusting its categories. Operative ekphrasis
is one such adjustment.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I thank Jules Pelta Feldman, Catriona MacLeod, Jay David
Bolter, Antonio Somaini, and an anonymous reviewer for
valuable feedback on various stages of this paper. I am also
indebted to the discussants at events at the Electronic
Literature Organization Conference 2022 in Como, Italy;
the University of California—Berkeley; the University of
Illinois—Chicago; the Paris National Institute of Art History;
the
University
of
Hamburg;
the
Technical
University
Braunschweig;
the
University
of
D€usseldorf;
and
the
University of Basel, where I had the opportunity to present
versions of this paper.
NOTES
1– See Jonathan Roberge and Michael Castelle, eds, The Cultural Life of
Machine Learning: An Incursion into Critical AI Studies (Cham: Springer,
WORD & IMAGE
87


── PAGE 13 ──
2021); American Literature 95, no. 2 [special issue on ‘Critical AI’] (2023);
the newly founded journal Critical AI 1, nos 1–2 (2023); and the mailing
list ‘All Models’, http://allmodels.ai, accessed on 3 January 2024.
2– Rita Raley and Jennifer Rhee, ‘Critical AI: A Field in Formation’,
American Literature 95, no. 2 (2023): 185–204, at 188.
3– Simon Lindgren, Critical Theory of AI (Cambridge: Polity, 2024);
Matteo Pasquinelli, The Eye of the Master: A Social History of Artificial
Intelligence (London: Verso, 2023); Kate Crawford, Atlas of AI: Power,
Politics, and the Planetary Costs of Artificial Intelligence (New Haven and
London: Yale University Press, 2021); Wendy Hui Kyong Chun and
Alex Barnett, Discriminating Data: Correlation, Neighborhoods, and the New
Politics of Recognition
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2021); Louise
Amoore, Cloud Ethics: Algorithms and the Attributes of Ourselves and Others
(Durham: Duke University Press, 2020).
4– Lisa Gitelman, ed., ‘Raw Data’ Is an Oxymoron (Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 2013); Adrian Mackenzie, Machine Learners: Archaeology of a Data
Practice (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2017); Clemens Apprich, Wendy
Hui
Kyong
Chun,
Florian
Cramer,
and
Hito
Steyerl,
Pattern
Discrimination (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2018).
5– Philip E. Agre, ‘The Soul Gained and Lost: Artificial Intelligence as
a Philosophical Project’, Stanford Humanities Review 4, no. 2 (1995): 1–19,
at 5.
6– Hans
Blumenberg,
‘An
Anthropological
Approach
to
the
Contemporary Significance of Rhetoric’, in History, Metaphors, Fables: A
Hans Blumenberg Reader, ed. Hannes Bajohr, Florian Fuchs, and Joe Paul
Kroll (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2020), 177–209, at 188.
7– Fabian Offert and Thao Phan, ‘A Sign that Spells: DALL-E 2,
Invisual Images and the Racial Politics of Feature Space’, arXiv, 26
October 2022, 1–4, at 3, http://arxiv.org/abs/2211.06323, accessed
on 12 July 2023.
8– Daniel C. Dennett, Intuition Pumps and Other Tools for Thinking (New
York: Norton, 2013). According to Dennett, an intuition pump works
by providing a simplified example, an analogy or a metaphor that helps
make complex concepts more comprehensible and intuitive. It is a way
to trigger instincts and intuitions about a situation in the hope of
understanding the underlying principles more clearly. In this case, the
concrete technology of ‘multimodal AI’ serves as an intuition pump for
the complex concept of ekphrasis. Unlike in Dennett’s case, however, I
find that not only does the example illustrate the concept, but also it is
able to modify it. This approach also informs the collected volume
Hannes Bajohr, ed., Thinking with AI: Machine Learning the Humanities
(London: Open Humanities Press, 2024).
9– Peter Schwenger, Asemic: The Art of Writing (Minneapolis: University
of Minnesota Press, 2019), 1.
10– N. Katherine Hayles, ‘Print Is Flat, Code Is Deep: The Importance
of Media-Specific Analysis’, Poetics Today 25, no. 1 (2004): 67–90;
Hannes Bajohr, ‘Algorithmic Empathy: Toward a Critique of Aesthetic
AI’, Configurations 30, no. 2 (2022): 203–31.
11– Jine [i.e., Jasmin Meerhoff], ‘They Lay’, GitLab, 24 February
2022, https://gitlab.com/nervousdata/they-lay, accessed on 2 May
2022.
12– Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea
Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen, and Ilya Sutskever, ‘Zero-Shot Text-
to-Image Generation’, arXiv, 26 February 2021, http://arxiv.org/abs/
2102.12092, accessed on 12 July 2023.
13– For more on text-to-image models, see the special issue ‘Generative
Imagery: Towards a “New Paradigm” of Machine Learning-Based
Image Production’, IMAGE. The Interdisciplinary Journal of Image Sciences
31, no. 1 (2023).
14– While the newer third version is integrated into ChatGPT, the
interface of DALL!E 2 shown is still available at https://labs.openai.
com, accessed on 22 December 2023.
15– Dave Orr, ‘Playing with DALL!E 2’, Lesswrong, 7 April 2022,
https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/r99tazGiLgzqFX7ka/playing-with-
dall-e-2, accessed on 2 May 2022.
16– On
the
issue
of
mangled
hands,
see
Amanda
Wasielewski,
‘Midjourney Can’t Count’, IMAGE 37, no. 1 (2023): 71–82, https://
doi.org/10.1453/1614-0885-1-2023-15454,
accessed
on
12
July
2023. For the inability to produce text, see Eliza Strickland, ‘DALL-E
2’s Failures are the Most Interesting Thing About It’, IEEE Spectrum, 14
July 2022, https://spectrum.ieee.org/openai-dall-e-2, accessed on 3
January 2024. However, this may be a function of parameter size:
Google’s Parti model seems able to produce text with a parameter count
above twenty billion: ‘Parti: Pathways Autoregressive Text-to-Image
Model’, Google Research, accessed on 12 July 2023, https://sites.
research.google/parti/, accessed on 12 July 2023. The same is true for
the
current
version
of
Midjourney:
‘Text
in
Midjourney
V6’,
Midjourney blog, 22 December 2023, https://mid-journey.ai/text-
generation-in-midjourney-v6/, accessed on 22 December 2023. I tried
DALL!E 3 as well as GPT-4o with Orr’s prompt and still found that
the systems output garbled text, although the title is often legible; if one
specifies the exact lines of the poem, however, the models can visualise
them relatively well now.
17– dall!ery gall!ery, ‘The DALL!E 2 Prompt Book, v1.02’. Dall!ery
gall!ery: Resources for Creative DALL!E Users, 2022, https://dallery.
gallery/wp-content/uploads/2022/07/The-DALL%C2%B7E-2-
prompt-book-v1.02.pdf, accessed on 12 July 2023.
18– ‘PromptBase’, https://promptbase.com, accessed on 12 July 2023.
19– I derive this conceptual distinction from an influential publication
that brought neural networks back into fashion under the rubric of
‘connectionism’: David E. Rumelhart, James McClelland, and Geoffrey
Hinton, ‘The Appeal of Parallel Distributed Processing’, in Parallel
Distributed Processing. Explanations in the Microstructure of Cognition, Vol. 1:
Foundations, ed. David E. Rumelhart, James McClelland, and PDP
Working Group, 2 vols (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1986), 3–44, at
43. The term ‘sequential’ for the classic algorithm stems from the same
book: David E. Rumelhart and James L. McClelland, ‘PDP Models and
General Issues in Cognitive Science’, in Rumelhart et al., Parallel
Distributed Processing, 110–46, at 116. For a more extensive discussion,
see Bajohr, ‘Algorithmic Empathy’.
20– Thomas Haigh and Paul E. Ceruzzi, A New History of Modern
Computing (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2021).
21– For a non-technical introduction, see John D. Kelleher, Deep
Learning (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2019). For a more technical
discussion, see Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville,
Deep Learning (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2016).
22– I make this point in more detail in Hannes Bajohr, ‘The Gestalt of
AI: Beyond the Holism–Atomism Divide’, Interface Critique 3 (2021): 13–
35, https://doi.org/10.11588/ic.2021.3.81304, accessed on 12 July
2023.
23– Fabian
Offert,
‘Can
We
Read
Neural
Networks?
Epistemic
Implications of Two Historical Computer Science Papers’, American
Literature
95,
no.
2
(2023):
423–28,
https://doi.org/10.1215/
00029831-10575218, accessed on 3 January 2024.
24– Ruth Webb, ‘Ekphrasis Ancient and Modern: The Invention of a
Genre’, Word & Image 15, no. 1 (January 1999): 7–18, at 7.
25– Ulrich Pfisterer, ‘Ekphrasis’, in Metzler Lexikon Kunstwissenschaft: Ideen,
Methoden, Begriffe, ed. Ulrich Pfisterer (Stuttgart: J. B. Metzler, 2019),
99–103, at 99; Webb, ‘Ekphrasis Ancient and Modern’, 8–9.
26– Webb, ‘Ekphrasis Ancient and Modern’, 8.
27– John Hollander, The Gazer’s Spirit: Poems Speaking to Silent Works of Art
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995), 7.
88
HANNES BAJOHR


── PAGE 14 ──
28– James A. W. Heffernan, ‘Ekphrasis: Theory’, in Handbook of
Intermediality: Literature–Image–Sound–Music, ed. Gabriele Rippl (Berlin: de
Gruyter, 2015), 35–49, at 35.
29– Leo Spitzer, ‘The “Ode on a Grecian Urn” or, Content vs.
Metagrammar’, in Essays on English and American Literature, ed. Anna
Hatcher (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1962), 67–97, at 72.
30– James A. W. Heffernan, Museum of Words: The Poetics of Ekphrasis
from Homer to Ashbery (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993), 3.
31– Tamar Yacobi, ‘Ekphrastic Double Exposure and the Museum
Book of Poetry’, Poetics Today 34, nos 1–2 (2013): 1–52, at 1, 3.
32– W. J. T. Mitchell, Picture Theory: Essays on Verbal and Visual
Representation (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994), 152–60.
33– Gotthold Ephraim Lessing, Laoco€on: An Essay upon the Limits of
Painting and Poetry, trans. Ellen Frothingham (Mineola: Dover, 2005), chs
15–16.
34– Mitchell, Picture Theory, 154.
35– Renate Brosch, ‘Ekphrasis in the Digital Age: Responses to Image’,
Poetics Today 39, no. 2 (2018): 225–43, at 227.
36– Espen J. Aarseth, Cybertext: Perspectives on Ergodic Literature (Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1997).
37– N.
Katherine
Hayles,
My
Mother
Was
a
Computer
(Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 2005), 50, 101.
38– The adjective ‘operative’, here, is thus meant to be understood
quite literally as ‘having the character as an operation’. It is not to be
confused with Harun Farocki’s operatives Bild, sometimes translated as
‘operative image’ or ‘operational image’, by which he means images
used in surveillance and war that do not require linguistic mediation
because they act as sensors rather than representations; Harun Farocki,
‘Phantom Images’, Public 29 (2004), https://public.journals.yorku.ca/
index.php/public/article/view/30354, accessed on 3 January 2024.
While
Jussi
Parikka,
taking
up
Farocki’s
idea,
highlights
the
performativity
of
images
themselves,
my
concept
makes
text
performative insofar as it produces an image; Jussi Parikka, Operational
Images:
From
the
Visual
to
the
Invisual
(Minneapolis:
University
of
Minnesota Press, 2023).
39– Thus Friedrich Kittler could, shortly after having pronounced that
there is no software but only hardware, exclude computer graphics from
the class of optical media by declaring them essentially alphabetical. A
pixel image, he wrote, ‘deceives the eye, which is meant to be unable to
differentiate between individual pixels, with the illusion or image of an
image, while in truth the mass of pixels, because of its thorough
addressability, proves to be structured more like a text composed
entirely of individual letters’; Friedrich A. Kittler, ‘Computer Graphics:
A Semi-Technical Introduction’, trans. Sara Ogger, Grey Room 2, no. 2
(2001): 30–45, at 32. A similar, if historically inverse, identification of
text and image is made by Vil"em Flusser, who claims that ‘The
invention of writing is not so much about the invention of new symbols,
but about the unfurling of the [two-dimensional] image into [one-
dimensional] rows (“lines”); Vil"em Flusser, Lob der Oberfl€achlichkeit: F€ur eine
Ph€anomenologie der Medien, 9 vols (Bensheim: Bollmann, 1993), 1: 67
(present author’s translation).
40–
Jay David Bolter, ‘Ekphrasis, Virtual Reality, and the Future of
Writing’, in The Future of the Book, ed. Geoffrey Nunberg (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1996), 253–72, at 269.
41– Ibid., 270.
42– I refer to the title of Jerome J. McGann, The Textual Condition
(Princeton:
Princeton
University
Press,
1991),
but
the
idea
that
everything digital may be understood as text can be found in Jerome J.
McGann, Radiant Textuality: Literature after the World Wide Web (New York:
Palgrave, 2001), 11.
43– ‘Virtually’, since Yuk Hui suggests that the ontology of the digital is
a broad spectrum that runs from ‘colorful visual beings’ at the interface
level to the ‘particles and fields’ that make up the circuit boards and the
electricity running through it; somewhere in the middle, ‘at the level of
programming’, there are ‘text files’. For present purposes, I will stick to
this
middle
position;
Yuk
Hui,
On
the
Existence
of
Digital
Objects
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2016), 27–28.
44– Loss Peque~no Glazier, ‘Code as Language’, Leonardo 14, no. 5
(2006), http://leoalmanac.org/journal/vol_14/lea_v14_n05-06/lpglazier.
asp, accessed on 12 July 2023. For a philosophically more sophisticated
version of this argument, see Juan Luis Gastaldi, ‘Why Can Computers
Understand Natural Language? The Structuralist Image of Language
Behind Word Embeddings’, Philosophy & Technology 34, no. 1 (2021):
149–214.
45– Stevan Harnad, ‘The Symbol Grounding Problem’, Physica D:
Nonlinear Phenomena 42, no. 1–3 (1990): 335–46.
46– Florian Cramer, ‘Language’, in Software Studies: A Lexicon, ed.
Matthew Fuller (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2008), 168–74, at
168–69.
47– However, there is a lively debate about how useful it is to speak of
a pragmatics of programming languages in a broader sense. One
suggestion is to say that ‘The pragmatic effects of the program in
execution [ … ] cause changes to occur in the internal state of the
computer’; J. H. Connolly and D. J. Cooke, ‘The Pragmatics of
Programming Languages’, Semiotica 151 (2004): 149–61, at 154.
Benjamin Bratton likewise suggests that ‘code is a kind of language that
is executable. [ … ] In this sense, linguistic “function” refers not only to
symbol manipulation competency, but also to the real-world functions
and effects of executed code’; Benjamin Bratton and Blaise Ag€uera y
Arcas, ‘The Model Is the Message’, Noema, 12 July 2022, https://www.
noemamag.com/the-model-is-the-message, accessed on 2 August 2022.
48– Paul
Pu
Liang,
Amir
Zadeh,
and
Louis-Philippe
Morency,
‘Foundations and Trends in Multimodal Machine Learning: Principles,
Challenges, and Open Questions’, arXiv, 20 February 2023, http://
arxiv.org/abs/2209.03430, accessed on 12 July 2023; Cem Akkus,
Luyang Chu, Vladana Djakovic, Steffen Jauch-Walser, Philipp Koch,
Giacomo
Loss,
Christopher
Marquardt,
Marco
Moldovan,
Nadja
Sauter, Maximilian Schneider, Rickmer Schulte, Karol Urbanczyk, Jann
Goschenhofer, Christian Heumann, Rasmus Hvingelby, Daniel Schalk,
and Matthias Aßenmacher, ‘Multimodal Deep Learning’, arXiv, 12
January 2023), http://arxiv.org/abs/2301.04856, accessed on 12 July
2023.
49– For this distinction, see Chip Huyen, ‘Multimodality and Large
Multimodal Models (LMMs)’, Chip Huyen blog, 10 October 2023,
https://huyenchip.com/2023/10/10/multimodal.html, accessed on 3
January 2024.
50–
OpenAI et al., ‘GPT-4 Technical Report’, arXiv, 18 December
2023,
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.08774;
and
OpenAI,
‘GPT-4V(ision) System Card’, 2023, https://openai.com/research/gpt-
4v-system-card, accessed on 3 January 2024.
51– Google Gemini Team, ‘Gemini: A Family of Highly Capable
Multimodal Models’, 2023, https://storage.googleapis.com/deepmind-
media/gemini/gemini_1_report.pdf, accessed on 16 October 2023;
OpenAI, ‘Hello GPT-4o’, 2024, https://openai.com/index/hello-gpt-
4o, accessed on 23 May, 2024.
52– See Bajohr, ‘Algorithmic Empathy’ for an attempt to make this
medi(a/um) specificity aesthetically fruitful for aesthetic AI; in a way,
the present study offers a counterargument to this earlier article by
highlighting not the separation but the collapse of text and image
medi(a/ums). At the same time, it confirms the insight that any
discussion of aesthetic AI needs to be aware of its technical substrate.
53–
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit,
Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin,
‘Attention Is All You Need’, in Advances in Neural Information Processing
WORD & IMAGE
89


── PAGE 15 ──
Systems, ed. Isabelle Guyon, Ulrike Von Luxburg, Samy Bengio, Hanna
Wallach, Rob Fergus, S. V.N. Vishwanathan, and Roman Garnett (Red
Hook, New York: Curran Associates, 2017), 5998–6008. For a step-by-
step explanation, see also Jay Allamar, ‘The Illustrated Transformer’,
2018, https://jalammar.github.io/illustrated-transformer, accessed on
12 July 2023.
54– For diffusion models, see Prafulla Dhariwal and Alex Nichol,
‘Diffusion Models Beat GANs on Image Synthesis’, arXiv, 1 June 2021,
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2105.05233,
accessed
on
12
July
2023.
55– Ryan O’Connor, ‘How DALL-E 2 Actually Works’, Assembly AI, 19
April
2022,
https://www.assemblyai.com/blog/how-dall-e-2-actually-
works/, accessed on 12 July 2023.
56– In recent memory, Emily Bender and Alexander Koller were the
most influential theorists to argue that large language models like
ChatGPT—which are unimodal—are not able to operate with meaning;
Emily M. Bender and Alexander Koller, ‘Climbing towards NLU: On
Meaning, Form, and Understanding in the Age of Data’, in Proceedings of
the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics [Online]
(Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020), 5185–98, https://
aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.463/x
accessed
on
12
July
2023.
However, because they understand meaning as text being ‘grounded’ in
the world, they have to allow for the possibility that multimodality may
lead to a model learning ‘some aspects of meaning’, because it grounds
text data in image date; ibid., 5193. I call this phenomenon ‘dumb’
meaning and explain it in more detail in Hannes Bajohr, ‘Dumb
Meaning: Machine Learning and Artificial Semantics’, IMAGE 37, no.
1 (2023): 58–70, https://doi.org/10.1453/1614-0885-1-2023-15452,
accessed on 12 July 2023.
57– Charles G. Gross, ‘Genealogy of the “Grandmother Cell”‘, The
Neuroscientist
8,
no.
5
(2002):
512–18,
https://doi.org/10.1177/
107385802237175, accessed on 12 July 2023.
58– Rodrigo Quian Quiroga, Leila Reddy, Gabriel Kreiman, Christof
Koch, and Itzhak Fried, ‘Invariant Visual Representation by Single
Neurons in the Human Brain’, Nature 435, no. 7045 (2005): 1102–07,
at 1102, 1106, https://doi.org/10.1038/nature03687, accessed on 12
July 2023. A 2009 study by some of the same authors explicitly call this
phenomenon multimodal; Rodrigo Quian Quiroga et al., ‘Explicit
Encoding of Multimodal Percepts by Single Neurons in the Human
Brain’, Current Biology 19, no. 15 (2009): 1308–13, https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.cub.2009.06.060, accessed on 12 July 2023.
59–
Gabriel Goh, Nick Cammarata, Chelsea Voss, Shan Carter,
Michael Petrov, Ludwig Schubert, Alec Radford, and Chris Olah,
‘Multimodal Neurons in Artificial Neural Networks’, Distill 6, no. 3
(2021), https://doi.org/10.23915/distill.00030, accessed on 12 July
2023. A more recent paper, now using a diffusion model (similar to
GLIDE), arrives at similar results; Zhiheng Liu, Ruili Feng, Kai Zhu,
Yifei Zhang, Kecheng Zheng, Yu Liu, Deli Zhao, Jingren Zhou, and
Yang
Cao,
‘Cones:
Concept
Neurons
in
Diffusion
Models
for
Customized Generation’, arXiv, 9 March 2023, http://arxiv.org/abs/
2303.05125, accessed on 12 July 2023.
60– However, while most researchers agree that there are mostly likely
no single grandmother neurons (one neuron for one concept), there is a
relatively broad consensus that, over time, concepts are indeed stored as
sparse rather than dense neural encodings in the brain; Marcel Bausch,
Johannes Niediek, Thomas P. Reber, Sina Mackay, Jan Bostr€om,
Christian E. Elger, and Florian Mormann, ‘Concept Neurons in the
Human Medial Temporal Lobe Flexibly Represent Abstract Relations
between Concepts’, Nature Communications 12, no. 1 (2021): 6164,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-26327-3, accessed on 12 July
2023. What this means is that while the brain may store many
individual features for single entities (‘dense encoding’), in the long run,
such encodings merge along shared features covering groups of entities
(‘sparse encoding’) located in smaller neuronal clusters. This process of
grouping more entities under a shared encoding is understood as
‘concept learning’. Moreover, a recent study explicitly found that this
process of concept learning—from dense to sparse encoding—is similar
to and can be simulated in artificial neural networks, suggesting, if not
homology,
at
least
analogous
behaviour;
Louis
Kang
and
Taro
Toyoizumi,
‘Distinguishing
Examples
While
Building
Concepts
in
Hippocampal and Artificial Networks’, Nature Communications 15, no. 1
(2024): 647, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-44877-0, accessed
on 3 January 2024. An OpenAI study likewise found that neural
networks use a sparse encoding for concepts; Leo Gao, Tom Dupr"e la
Tour, Henk Tillman, Gabriel Goh, Rajan Troll, Alec Radford, Ilya
Sutskever, Jan Leike, and Jeffrey Wu, ‘Scaling and Evaluating Sparse
Autoencoders’, arXiv, 6 June 2024, http://arxiv.org/abs/2406.04093,
accessed on 24 June, 2024.
61– Bender and Koller, ‘Climbing towards NLU: On Meaning, Form,
and Understanding in the Age of Data’, 5185–98.
62– Hubert L. Dreyfus, What Computers Still Can’t Do: A Critique of
Artificial Reason (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992).
63– As such, multimodal AI is more than remediation, as Jay David
Bolter suggested, since this term still keeps the separation of media
intact;
Jay
David
Bolter,
‘AI
Generative
Art
as
Algorithmic
Remediation’, IMAGE 37, no. 1 (2023): 195–207.
64– Liliane Louvel, Le tiers pictural (Rennes: Presses Universitaires de
Rennes, 2010).
65– W. J. T. Mitchell, ‘There are No Visual Media’, Journal of Visual
Culture
4,
no.
2
(2005):
257–66,
https://doi.org/10.1177/
1470412905054673, accessed on 12 July 2023.
66– Jonathan Roberge and Michael Castelle, ‘Toward an End-to-End
Sociology of 21st-Century Machine Learning’, in The Cultural Life of
Machine Learning, 1–30, at 6.
90
HANNES BAJOHR
View publication stats
