# Ekphrasis in Recent Popular Novels
# Source: Brosch - 2018 - Ekphrasis in Recent Popular Novels.pdf
# BibTeX key: brosch_ekphrasis_2018
# Zotero dir: 3126
# Extracted chars: 61821
# Format: PDF
============================================================

── PAGE 1 ──
Ekphrasis in Recent Popular Novels:
Reafﬁrming the Power of Art Images
Renate Brosch
University of Stuttgart
Abstract
This article examines the uses of ekphrasis in recent popular novels, situated
in a cultural economy in which there is great public interest in art objects and the world
of artists, dealers, and collectors. Discussing novels by Siri Hustvedt, Thomas van
Essen, Ali Smith, and Donna Tartt and casting side-glances at several others, it iden-
tifies some common strategies for presenting the ekphrastic object. These novels typi-
cally present the artwork through the subjective and highly affective gaze of a fictional
character; they problematize the status and role of the artist, particularly in terms of
gender; they posit that art objects trigger unquenchable desire; and— most signifi-
cantly — they attribute transformative power to such objects. By affirming the power
of art images to improve empathy and relationality in their privileged viewers, the
novels reauratize art, supplementing traditional ideas of sublimity and epistemological
benefit with an ethical effect.
Keywords
reader response, empathy, power of art, reauratization, cultural memory
1. Novels in the Art Market
The last two decades have seen an astonishing upsurge of ekphrasis in popu-
lar novels. Most frequent and conspicuous among its objects are canonical
works of art—especially paintings—by famous artists. It seems that the more
we are surrounded by the digital, the more precious surviving art objects from
periods of manual production become. The preoccupation with works of art
in novels such as Donna Tartt’s The Goldfinch, Ali Smith’s How to Be Both, and
Poetics Today 39:2 ( June 2018)
DOI 10.1215/03335372-4324529
q 2018 by Porter Institute for Poetics and Semiotics
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/403/528934/0390403.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 2 ──
Thomas van Essen’s The Center of the World, may be seen as part of an inten-
sified fixation on Western cultural inheritance from the past.
In contrast to traditional ekphrastic poetry addressed to an educated read-
ership bonding via elite connoisseurship about “the Old Masters” (as in
Auden’s “Muse´e des Beaux Arts”), popular art novels nowadays aim at larger
audiences, as do contemporary museum practices. The various outreach
strategies that museums throughout the world are successfully utilizing to
increase the number of museumgoers are matched by new processes of cir-
culating and popularizing novels that dissolve the boundaries between cul-
tural and consumer spaces. As Jim Collins convincingly shows, the cultural
distinctions that Pierre Bourdieu made between restricted and large-scale
cultural productions no longer apply to the current hybrid literary field where
books circulate through fan blogs, superstores, Amazon websites, and tele-
vision book clubs and where increasingly large-scale and interdependent
systems of delivery, circulation, consecration, and adaptation of novels reach
“the public at large” (2010: 32–33). It is in this sense of participating in an
encompassing, converging media ecology that I refer to my literary examples
as popular novels. As part of popular culture, these novels contribute to
cultural memory by reinforcing certain images and ideas.
With the increasing frequency of ekphrasis and its spread to popular nar-
ratives in recent years, ekphrastic writing has accrued different functions.
These functions are my focus in this article. I hope to shed some light on the
current use of visual art in novels, to examine the role of artworks in a number
of recent novels and the narrative techniques employed in their presentation,
considering also what ekphrasis accomplishes for the reader and his or her
comprehension of and response to the text. Though ekphrastic novels exhibit
a wide variety of uses of artworks, what appears to be a common concern is
a pervasive preoccupation with the nature of art and artists. Equally long-
standing is the preoccupation with conventional ways of seeing and spec-
tatorship. Though recent novels often exploit the opportunity to reflect on
the gender question of vision, and the implicit and explicit power structures of
visibility, they also—surprisingly, in light of the dominant anti-metaphysical
concepts of culture—converge in a shared confirmation of the power of art,
so that the democratic broadening of address goes hand in hand with a
relatively narrow and conservative conception of art. If one had to name
one common denominator in the function of ekphrasis in recent popular
novels, it would have to be the attempt to reauratize art.
However, given the affinity for the popular on the part of both the art
market and the museum world, it is perhaps not surprising that recent novels
reinstate and affirm traditional cultural axioms about the “nature” of art.
The majority of recent popular novels regardless of their ideological affinities
404
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/403/528934/0390403.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 3 ──
are conservative in endorsing the romantic concept of the “power of images”
(Freedberg 1989), enhanced via the emotional impact of ekphrastic viewing
in the novels. In modernist novels, ekphrasis was often linked to moments of
epiphany in which characters experienced profound revelations, whether
these were spelled out for the reader or not. Today’s novels also foreground
subjective experiences and emotional drama in ekphrastic encounters, but
these narrative elements are often employed in the service of a communal and
interpersonal ethics, instead of the more individualistic values of the modern-
ist period. Using novels by Siri Hustvedt, Donna Tartt, Thomas van Essen,
and Ali Smith as examples, the following article examines four central pre-
occupations: (1) the enactment of the gaze, (2) artists and the creative process,
(3) the desire unleashed by great artworks, and (4) the ethical and epistemol-
ogical benefit of art.
For authors, the dialogue with the creative work of others is a means of
energizing and upgrading their own fictions. Referencing works of high art
can confer on the referencing medium an instant rise in status. For these
novels, adding the motif of a visual art object confers a surplus boost of
prestige and value. Ekphrasis in fictions can be related at least partly to the
shifting ground of material culture and its basis in economic market forces.
The art market has proved an ever more attractive area of financial invest-
ment, and the high prices it generates have in turn fueled the public’s fasci-
nation with the glamor of art and artists. However, the rise in interest in the
visual arts is not only economically motivated: museums and art galleries
have developed more inclusive curatorship, offering captivating shows that
have broadened the spectatorship once limited to an educated community.
Since the 1980s, museums have been competing as part of the leisure and
entertainment industry and hence have had to consider the needs and desires
of a broader audience for their presentations (Schwend 2012: 19). This grow-
ing interest in art is manifested in blockbuster exhibitions that have become
magnets for enormous crowds of viewers, and very likely informs the interest
of readers of novels, as well. Given the infinite storage capacity and massive
distribution of images in the electronic media, memory—on the individual
as well as the collective scale—is likely to store many more images than fifty
years ago, so that to mention a Caravaggio or Edward Hopper is to evoke
instant associations. Given the present-day saturation of the individual and
the collective imaginary with images, authors can count on readers’ abilities
to promptly visualize bygone legendary achievement, masterpieces, or genius
personalities.
These conservative interests are served by Donna Tartt’s The Goldfinch, a
good example of ekphrasis’s contribution to safeguarding the heritage of an
artwork previously known only to specialists. The title of this enormously
Brosch
† Ekphrasis in Recent Popular Novels
405
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/403/528934/0390403.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 4 ──
popular novel is also that of the real painting at its center, a small 1654
masterpiece by Carel Fabritius, a pupil of Rembrandt and a teacher of
Vermeer. Fabritius is regarded as a forgotten genius; when he was killed at
the age of thirty-two in a gunpowder explosion near his studio, almost all his
work was destroyed. “The Goldfinch” is widely considered the finest of the
paintings that survived. The Frick Collection in New York, which exhibited
the painting shortly after the publication of the novel, had not seen so many
visitors in years (Peretz 2014).
At the same time, the novel performs a radical recontextualization of the
painting, inserting it into unlikely contemporary settings. The Goldfinch is not
alone in doing this; following an established tradition in ekphrastic writing,
it is a common strategy to remove art objects from their familiar settings in
order to open surprising new perspectives and to make startling departures
from the readers’ expectations. In cases of an actual ekphrasis like this, it is the
privilege of fictional engagements with history to revise traditional views of
these objects from the past, to question conventional assumptions governing
their dominant interpretation, and to shift center stage things and people
hitherto neglected. In doing so, ekphrastic novels possess some of the appeal
of historical fiction, namely its double nature as a source of factual infor-
mation about and a fictive, imaginative extension of the past. This duality
gratifies two opposing desires in readers: to actively share “real” historical
knowledge, on the one hand, but also to be hoodwinked into entering an
alternative universe on the other. Ekphrastic novels’ fabrication of a story
around an object of cultural memory is multifunctional: it restores the object
to the current cultural imaginary, adapts or revises its meaning, and thereby
discusses and questions historical values and ideas in comparison with con-
temporary ones (Assmann 2005 [1992]: 227). Consequently, the often re-
peated assessment that ekphrasis transforms readers into viewers must be
taken with a grain of salt, since defamiliarized images turn readers from
passive viewers into imaginative creators of images, a consequence that
tends to intensify these passages in the reading experience and thus helps
perpetuate the myth of art as a source of mysterious power.
2. Staging the Gaze
Narrative ekphrasis involves the performance of seeing. By staging a visual
observation, narratives are liable to reflect on particular ways of seeing and
on the relation between the subject and the object of a significant act of visual
scrutiny. I choose the term stage to emphasize that the ekphrastic passages in
the novels under examination do not primarily represent an artwork; their
more important function is to enact an experience of visual observation and
406
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/403/528934/0390403.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 5 ──
to question ways of seeing and showing. This effect has broad cultural and
philosophical implications and can therefore mobilize reflections on the
evaluation and interpretation of the chosen images. In staging the gaze
directed at a visual object, novels are able to elevate signification onto a
metalevel by presenting a visual pathway to “subjects of knowledge.” The
intersection of figures of sight and insight is particularly salient in “the con-
temporary,” which “suffers from a lack of visual clarity” despite its over-
abundance of images (Boxall 2013: 23). By providing new ways of perceiving
and assessing images from the archive of cultural memory, ekphrastic writing
becomes empowered to influence the constant rewriting of cultural memory
and to reevaluate that elusive storehouse of images that shapes the shifting
ground of a culture’s identity.
In order to assess these effects, the reading process of and response to the
narrative needs to be considered. Such a response-oriented approach recu-
perates the classical concept of ekphrasis, in which “it is the act of seeing that is
imitated, not the object itself” (Webb 2009: 128). The effect holds for present-
day examples: extraordinarily vivid images emerge in the reading experience
typically when subjective, character-oriented perception is described as close
attention. It is a specific task of fiction to present subjective experience, and
the experience of seeing art images typically enhances privileged and climac-
tic moments in the novels’ plots, often involving great emotions. Hence, on
the level of form and narrative technique, ekphrasis involves focalization,
defamiliarization, and dramatization. These techniques conspire to unleash
surprising and violent reactions in the fictional characters confronted with
artworks. Many literary critics suggest that readerly imagining is highlighted
when fictional characters are specially mentioned as seeing something (Auyoung
2015; Brosch 2015; Esrock 1994: 183; Otis 2015; Scarry 2001; Starr 2015).
For instance, Elaine Scarry claims that visualizations are particularly vivid
when guided by an intermediary in the text and explains that the most intense
visualizations occur when what comes to be imitated is not only the sensory
outcome but the “deep structure of production” that gave rise to the percep-
tion (1996: 161).
One reason the fictional perceptions of characters are so engaging may be
our person-oriented interest in narrative fictions, particularly in passages that
possess emotional valence and affective quality (Vermeule 2010: 2). Instances
of character focalization entail the character’s emotions and state of mind
and hence contain the potential for empathy. Through an appeal to embod-
ied knowledge, affective viewing by a fictional character provokes an emu-
lative visualization on the part of the reader. Relating to personalized scenes
of observation involves affect and emotions and thus provides an important
ingredient for an intensification of visualization. Vividness of mental imagery
Brosch
† Ekphrasis in Recent Popular Novels
407
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/403/528934/0390403.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 6 ──
in turn renders the latter more emotionally salient for the reader (Richardson
2011: 683). This effect is underscored by the dramatic reactions of fictional
characters to the art objects they see.
Even a callous narrator like Julius in Teju Cole’s novel Open City, discussed
by Gabriele Rippl in her article in this issue, becomes deeply absorbed in his
only confrontation with paintings, transfixed by the “total quietness” and
“suspension of time” in the images: “I lost all track of time before these
images, fell deep into their world, as if all the time between them and me
had somehow vanished. . . . When I eventually walked down the stairs and
out of the museum, it was with the feeling of someone who had returned to
the earth from a great distance” (Cole 2011: 39–40). It is remarkable that this
emotionally numb protagonist breaks through the shell of his cerebral solip-
sism only when contemplating art.
The reader’s visualization of such passages of affective seeing in the fic-
tional world is dependent on embodied experience and cultural knowledge
recalled from memory, where neither of these input domains are entirely
subjective and personal but rely on a shared mental makeup and experience
(Brosch 2013). Images evoked by a narrative text make an appeal to embod-
ied experience because they produce a recall of actual perceptions, so that
their reception resembles the experiential parameters of perceptions in every-
day life. This is a bottom-up process: the textual cues trigger a semiautomatic
or fully automatic response; this aspect of response is then geared toward the
presence effect of the visual in the narrative. It may be conceptualized as
a present-day version of the idea of enargeia that the ancients aspired to in
graphic description. Prompted by textual guidance and instructions, readers
commonly respond by producing mental imagery related to narrative con-
tent. In contrast to the ongoing events and narrated action in a novel, which
contribute toward maintaining the illusion of the storyworld, ekphrastic writ-
ing can lift a narrative passage out of the indistinct vagueness of the ongoing
imagination of a story. It can stall the flow of mental images by providing a
halting place for a more attentive imagination. In terms of experientiality, in
other words, it can slow down and intensify the imagination of the fiction.1
One does not have to look far for pertinent examples:
The painting was like none of his others. It was just of me, of my head and shoul-
ders, with no tables or curtains, no windows or powderbrushes to soften and dis-
tract. He had painted me with my eyes wide, the light falling across my face but
the left side of me in shadow. I was wearing blue and yellow and brown. The cloth
1. This argument is not geared toward textuality and structure as was Murray Krieger’s famous
formalist definition of ekphrasis as stasis or “still-point” (1992 [1967]), but rather focuses on the
phenomenology of reading.
408
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/403/528934/0390403.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 7 ──
round my head made me look not like myself but like a Griet from another town,
from another country altogether. The background was black, making me appear
very much alone, although I was clearly looking at someone. (Chevalier 1999:
202 – 3)
The simple but intensely personalized description from Tracy Chevalier’s
novel Girl with a Pearl Earring (1999) is likely to elicit a visceral, embodied
reading in which the feelings and mood are projected onto the imagined
portrait. But visualization alone cannot account for this quasi-sensual experi-
ence. Embodied and enactive mental processes triggered in the reader evoke
emotional reactions that are supplemented with input from cultural memory,
as in this case when the title and cover of the novel in question have already
told us that we are looking at Vermeer’s famous Girl with a Pearl Earring.
Hence, while the description allows a contemplative arrest in the ongoing
realization of the story, which highlights this image from the stream of default
visualization, it also evokes associations with or deliberate acts of connecting
to prior knowledge and memory about Vermeer’s work.
An embodied response to the passage just quoted is a visual impression
shot through with the feelings of loneliness and vulnerability of the focalizing
character Griet. Her feelings of anxiety as Vermeer’s model and her awe in
looking at the artwork invest the narrative with affective appeal. The novel
heightens the drama by inventing a deadlock in the process of artistic cre-
ation: in the quoted passage, Vermeer’s painting is stalled at a stage of not
quite satisfying the artist’s idea of color scheme and composition. This drama
of artistic creation is not just narrated, it is made to resonate with the reader
through a slight defamiliarization in the ekphrastic passage: we are asked to
imagine the famous portrait without the earring. In the narrative rewriting this
becomes the climactic moment when Griet, not the great painter, comes up
with the idea of wearing a pearl to offset the darkness in the background.
While the girl’s feelings of wonder and respect are conventional topoi, the fact
that the articulate voice presenting the picture and the creative mind behind
the solution of the aesthetic problem both belong to her goes against the grain
of cultural memory and its conventional gender roles. The text’s strategy of
involvement is to make the reader participate in the mental construction of
an effective picture. This productive tension in the novel provokes simul-
taneously the reader’s embodied and critical response. Embodied reactions
and interpretive, critical responses are interrelated processes: the automatic
sensory response of visualization is serviced by the cultural memory in which
each individual participates (Collins 1991: xi). Since these mental activities
always occur within a preexisting social field and within actual power re-
lations, a given narrative may either confirm or question existing schemata
Brosch
† Ekphrasis in Recent Popular Novels
409
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/403/528934/0390403.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 8 ──
(Bryson 2001: 5). Our mental images are never “innocent” or acultural. They
are always embedded in cultural practices, knowledge systems and power
regimes, and from this situatedness, they produce subject positions and hier-
archies (Reavey 2011: xxvii).
Without implying the emotions of characters, ekphrastic description would
have limited affective appeal. Consequently, awestruck paralysis and emo-
tional turmoil are by no means unusual in fictional observers. In Kim Dever-
eux’s beautifully written novel Rembrandt’s Mirror, the maid Hendrickje is
empowered almost magically to enlarge her vision of the world beyond the
limits imposed by her Calvinist upbringing through contact with the artist
and an oeuvre “infused with God’s breath” (Devereux 2015: 74). It is typical
of characters in the novels under examination to be overaffected and at the
same time unable to comprehend or explain either the visual object or their
own stupefied reaction to it. The dramatization of subjective reactions has
remained an enduring strategy of reauratizing art in popular novels.
3. Artists and the Creative Process
Many critics, most notably James Heffernan (1993), have emphasized that
the inherent tension and conflict in ekphrasis is often played out in gendered
power structures. Contemporary instances seem to retain the metarepresen-
tational interest in modes of seeing, which has been a long-standing pre-
occupation of ekphrasis, but they employ it to problematize the binary
distribution of roles between male artist and female muse/model or male
spectator and female image. When the perspective is from the sidelines,
observing the artist from outside his consciousness, as in Girl with a Pearl
Earring, we get a sense that the mute and marginalized female helpmates,
the models and muses, played a larger and more productive role than has
been acknowledged in art history.
Siri Hustvedt’s The Blazing World employs a different strategy for under-
mining the logic of the male gaze by making the problem of the female artist
in a male-dominated art world her central theme. The novel emplots the
enduring prejudices against women artists in the history of painting and in
the contemporary art world. “All intellectual and artistic endeavors,” writes
the female painter-protagonist of The Blazing World, “even jokes, ironies, and
parodies, fare better in the mind of the crowd when the crowd knows that
somewhere behind the great work or the great spoof it can locate a cock and a
pair of balls” (Hustvedt 2014: 1). The neglected artist Harriet (Harry) Bur-
den, living in New York at the close of the twentieth century, decides to take
action against cultural misogyny by persuading three of her male contempo-
raries to show her work under their own names. Each of these male surrogates
410
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/403/528934/0390403.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 9 ──
enjoys extravagant success with Harriet’s installations, thus proving her sus-
picion of gender bias correct. But Harriet’s vengeance on the biased art world
fails completely, as this money-driven, capitalist subsystem is resistant to the
facts of female authorship behind its most exciting and financially promising
art shows.
Harriet chooses her male foils carefully to represent different aspects of the
masculinity that is not only tolerated but endorsed in connection with male
artistic fame. Under the guise of the young, photogenic prodigy, “Anton
Tish,” her work is read by critics as a comment on art history; through the
black and gay performance artist, “Phineas Q. Eldridge,” her work explores
identity; and through the egocentric, media-savvy, macho artist “Rune,” her
work thematizes seduction and masculinity. Yet this elaborate project,
intended as a postponed rehabilitation of herself as an artist, becomes
another instance of her exploitation, when her alter ego Rune claims her
creations as his own (Hustvedt 2014: 308). She discovers that her successful
mimicry puts her at a decided disadvantage in the face of male dominance in
public discourse. Her failure is problematic in terms of the novel’s message:
since Harriet’s designs hide her identity behind her chosen “Masks” (the title
of her project), she is at least partly responsible when her authorship becomes
dubious and contested. The intention to create awareness of female artists’
disadvantages is undermined by “the fact that Hustvedt’s character adapts
her work for each surrogate artist, thus at least partially becoming them,
rather than, as Burden describes it, ‘wearing’ them” (Whitfield 2014: n.p.).
Harriet’s struggle with the phallocentricity of the cultural elite and gender-
inflected habits of seeing constitutes the wider interest of the novel beyond its
exploration of art-world mechanisms. As the summary shows, the novel is at
home in the realm of ideas, which are presented in the multiperspectival form
of an archive, assembling media responses, critical reviews, and academic
research about Harriet’s provocative project and juxtaposing these with the
more personal accounts in Harriet’s diary, her best friend’s testimony and the
statements of her personal New Age healer. Hustvedt is intent on showing
how questions of authorship come to be subordinated to the shifting ground
of authoritative public discourse.
These philosophical and political motives (and those of the central char-
acter) are contained in the relatively obvious didactic messages of Harriet’s
artworks, which are rendered through elaborate and detailed descriptions.
According to Whitfield, these transparent illustrations of the artist’s ideas
“come across as literal-minded and adolescent” (Whitfield 2014: n.p.). The
first installation is an obvious comment on the manipulative historiography of
art: a mash-up of quotations written on the gallery walls and an accompany-
ing giant sculpture of a recumbent female nude pasted all over with scraps
Brosch
† Ekphrasis in Recent Popular Novels
411
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/403/528934/0390403.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 10 ──
of writing. The recurrent motif of boxes in later installations alludes to the
confinement of women, and the element of the maze, whose tactile and
disorienting form is prominent in the last installation, stresses the forgotten
involvement of the body in processes of perception and understanding. Sup-
ported by the theoretical explanations in Harriet’s notes, the lengthy, ambi-
tious descriptions of Harriet’s oeuvre do not fail to deliver their message. But
these efforts at creating in verbal form innovative visuality lack the estrange-
ment that actual ekphrasis typically performs.
Though Hustvedt reworks gender stereotypes and exposes power imbal-
ances, her concepts of art remain within the bounds of received ideas. We are
meant to understand that Harriet, though unappreciated by the art market,
has immortalized herself in her works. Not only does she experience a spir-
itual epiphany through her aesthetic production, but this effect is meant to
feed into the reader’s recognition that her art is immortal because of its
restitution of aura (“blazing world”). At the end of the novel, when Harriet
is on her deathbed, her caretaker pronounces the final verdict on her art-
works, which uncannily reiterates the enduring myth of art’s spirituality: “I
turned around to take one last look at Harry’s artworks, and then I saw their
auras blazing out all around them . . . and I knew for certain that each and
every one of those wild, nutty, sad things Harry had made was alive with the
spirit. For a second there, I could almost hear them breathing” (Hustvedt
2014: 379). In occupying a prominent position at the very end of the novel,
this quasi-religious response to the spirituality and vitality of the artwork
reaffirms one of the mythic commonplaces about the nature of art at the
price of blunting the edge of Hustvedt’s feminist critique.
4. Desire and Obsession Triggered by Art
Many ekphrastic novels follow an enduring tradition that links the viewing of
an artwork to desire and obsession. It is therefore not surprising that they
often employ a crime plot focused on the artwork. This is the case in Hannah
Rothschild’s The Improbability of Love (2015), a page-turner about the sinister
maneuvers of Nazi art dealers who pose as Jews to whitewash their illegal
seizure of paintings from Jewish families in Nazi Germany. In Rothschild’s
thriller a dense population of avaricious collectors, desperate auctioneers,
unscrupulous dealers, and one lone innocent appreciative woman circle a
fictional masterpiece like a pack of hungry wolves. A fictional lost picture by
Watteau exerts such power over its beholders that they resort to criminal
machinations to possess it.
Donna Tartt’s The Goldfinch makes use of a real historical painting for
similar narrative effects. Here also the painting functions primarily as a
412
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/403/528934/0390403.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 11 ──
plot device. Around the image of the painting, Tartt engineers a complicated
Bildungsroman about Theo Decker, whose adolescent world is violently turned
upside down when his mother is killed in a terrorist bomb attack on the
Metropolitan Museum of Art. Stunned by the explosion and carnage, Theo
makes off with the Fabritius masterpiece. For the next fourteen years, the
painting becomes both his burden and his prized connection to his lost
mother, as the novel moves from a story of childish trauma to one of crime
set in the murky underworld of illegal art dealing. In an uninhibited appeal to
affective reading, we are meant to see the bird, “this lonely little captive,” as
analogous to the novel’s protagonist, a fellow sufferer “chained to his perch”
as Theo is to the illegal possession of the painting and to the memory of his
mother (Tartt 2013: 765).
This amplificatory function of ekphrasis is supplemented by extravagant
claims about the sublime nature of art. According to Tom Lubbock’s read-
ing, Fabritius’s exquisite tiny oil “holds before you the fundamental discrep-
ancy of Western art” (2006: n.p.). At first sight, it is a classic trompe l’oeil
image that abolishes the “discrepancy between subject and paint.” Lured
into a seamless illusion, he states, we could easily equate the wall that forms
the background with a three-dimensional wall. Yet, at the very center of
interest, the life-size bird is on closer inspection very clearly made up of
brushstrokes, inviting viewers to notice the paint and technique (Lubbock
2006: n.p.). This appreciation of the dual aesthetics of painting is echoed
briefly in Tartt’s novel when Theo states, “you see the mark, you see the paint
for the paint, and also the living bird” (Tartt 2013: 579). He is fascinated by
the “slide of transubstantiation where paint is paint and yet also feather and
bone” (ibid.: 766).
In stealing the painting, Theo follows an inexplicable spontaneous impulse,
but his retention of it despite his anxieties about illegal possession and fear
of discovery is attributed to some magic hold that the object supposedly has
on him, even as he gradually develops genuine appreciation. At the end
of the novel, having survived his excursion into crime and drug addiction,
Theo, whose connection to the painting has been mainly possessive and
obsessive so far, suddenly voices his belief that art is able to lift us above
ourselves. “The painting,” he observes, “was the still point where it all hinged:
dreams and signs, past and future, luck and fate” (ibid.: 755). In an unac-
countable illumination he suddenly discerns a place of meaning, “a rainbow
edge . . . where all art exists, and all magic. And . . . all love” (ibid.: 770). Thus
the novel concludes with the high-minded concept that the eternity of a work
of art can make the keenest losses more bearable. According to James Wood,
Tartt’s “consoling message,” “that what will survive of us is great art,” is
tacked on in the book’s final pages in a bid for seriousness and sophistication
Brosch
† Ekphrasis in Recent Popular Novels
413
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/403/528934/0390403.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 12 ──
(2013: n.p.). The Goldfinch can serve as an example of a novel that makes an
effort to embed itself in the tradition of the “power of images,” although the
fictional events compromise the credibility of this effort.
Thomas van Essen’s novel The Center of the World (2013) employs the most
obvious gendered icon in Western visual art—the female nude—to develop
its story of excessive desire for possession. In this case, a lascivious painting of
Helen of Troy is the object of intense fetishization and desire on the part of
its exclusively male viewers. The novel’s story of a (fictitious) lost masterpiece
by the nineteenth-century British landscape artist Joseph Mallord William
Turner is animated by the premise that the image is so daring and dangerous
that it has been hidden for decades, only to be rediscovered thanks to a series
of accidents and the determination of some ruthless art lovers. The painting
portrays the mythical Helen looking over the battlements of Troy, surveying
the havoc of the war she has caused. This representation of the famous
beauty, imbued with mystical beauty and erotic life force, becomes the driv-
ing force of the characters’ actions and thereby of the whole plot.
Van Essen’s novel narrates the events partly through an authorial narrator
and partly through four main focalizing characters: two contemporaries of
Turnerand two twenty-first-century rivals.From chapter to chapter, the novel
moves deftly among different narrative strands to reveal the story of the
painting’s conception, realization, acquisition, disappearance, and rediscov-
ery. In the unfolding of these episodically narrated events, the story gains
momentum, suspense mounts, and the disparate characters converge around
the painting as if subject to a magnetic force. In this way the narration
resembles the effect of the painting, a stunning, almost alchemically powerful
work that is said to enthrall, entice, and—in one way or another—enslave
everyone who views it.
The story of its production hints at licentiousness, carnality, and prurience
in the artist’s handling of his nude model as well as in the content of his
painting. Yet the ekphrastic passages decline to render any of these suspicions
concrete. Instead, van Essen sets out to demonstrate the dual nature of the
phenomenon, at once tempting and unsatisfying, that Mitchell famously
called “ekphrastic fear” and “ekphrastic hope” (1994: 152–54). Each of the
characters sees something different, some undergo a devastating existential
crisis, but none look upon this image unscathed. Those who gaze upon it
describe the composition in terms that range from the spiritual to the orgias-
tic. A contemporary American character reports:
I don’t know how long I sat there. The day turned into evening. As the light in the
barn faded and changed, I understood things that had been incomprehensible a
moment before, while the certainties of the previous hour were lost. I remembered
414
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/403/528934/0390403.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 13 ──
sensing a presence of the gods, although I knew they were not depicted on the
canvas. (van Essen 2013: 64).
And later:
I had felt the power that fires all poetry and moves the world. I had seen Helen of
Troy. I knew the truth of her like no one who is now alive, like no one who has been
alive for a hundred years. (ibid.: 113)
Every time another character lingers over the canvas, new details in the
composition come to light—a kitten, an eagle, or a jeweled cup from Helen’s
marriage to Menelaus, which overflows with shells from Troy’s shores, the
lyre with strings still vibrating (ibid.: 92), “the armour of the heroes sparkling
on the plain” (ibid.: 18), “the carnage of battle” (ibid.: 187), soldiers crying,
horses rearing (ibid.: 188), and “ships in the far distance . . . hope and fear on
the mariners, faces” (ibid.: 117). Some observers have synesthetic experi-
ences, hearing music and sounds of battle, others glimpse the passing of
gods through the picture’s luminous light. This profusion of sensuous details
is clearly implausible and as the narrative continues to accumulate them, the
painting verges on the fantastic, thus removing the image from the rest of the
realistic storyworld.
The effect of such foregrounding of secondary elements in the painting
is ekphrastic defamiliarization. The center of the painting—the seductive
Helen—seems to recede increasingly into the background. None of the nar-
rating voices captures her person or alluring body in words. For the fictional
characters this appears to be beside the point; their attention veers naturally
to the sidelines, taking in each new pictorial content with surprise and delight.
For the reader, the painting becomes less visualizable with each narrated
viewing, each description making it less conceivable. The expectations that
were first suspensefully excited in the reader are disappointed; instead of a
voluptuous nude we are treated to a world of fractured plenitude in which
chaosandwar arebalanced with thesublime beauty of nature. Thus ekphrasis
ultimately stands for absence and unrepresentability, and it dispels the illu-
sion that a work of art can ever be rendered adequately in words. The novel
denies what is the very premise of ekphrastic hope: that painting and writing
are alike in “the power to create an illusion of presence” together with “an
awareness of absence” (Webb 2009: 194).
Hence, the ironical withholding of the object at the center of the novel’s
interest and the refusal to satisfy the reader’s curiosity emphasize absence as
a condition for the desiring gaze. This withholding of description shifts the
reader’s affective engagement from the visual representation to the charac-
ters and their contrasting modes of viewing, which are meant to be reflected
Brosch
† Ekphrasis in Recent Popular Novels
415
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/403/528934/0390403.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 14 ──
on and evaluated by readers. The narrative strategy of multiple focalization,
staging varieties of the gaze, allows van Essen to do what is commonly des-
ignated as the noblest task of ekphrasis: to reflect on and interrogate ways of
seeing. In spite of its conventional gendering of subject and object in art
spectatorship, the novel undermines what Norman Bryson (1983) has iden-
tified as the masterful male objectifying gaze. In the course of the narrative,
with ekphrastic visibility obviously denied, alternative viewing options become
a matter for readerly reflection.
5. The Beneﬁt of Art
In The Center of the World, as subjective ekphrasis surfaces across the course of
two centuries, each of the characters experiences a kind of transcendence and
transformation through the encounter with the artwork. The novel follows a
contemporary ethical agenda in directing attention to the capacity of char-
acters to transcend the desire to possess, foregoing their egoistic impulses.
The main protagonist and I-narrator puts this feeling into the words, “It was
as if I had ceased to be” (van Essen 2013: 312). It invariably happens to
viewers of the painting, that some magic force within it turns them into
kinder, more empathetic beings and improves their closest, most intimate
relations. Noting the “affective power” of images, Richard Meek explains
that “ekphrasis is often concerned with empathy and serves as a means of
both figuring and eliciting the reader’s emotional responses” (2009: 17).
While the epistemological benefit of being in the presence of a great work
of art has been an enduring topos not just in fictional literature but also in life-
writing and even in art criticism, the novels under discussion infuse the con-
cept of the sublimity of art with an ethical effect. Modernist ekphrastic writing
was often concerned to generate an epiphany by probing the depths of a
spectator’s consciousness. The fictional moment of looking at a work of art
was very often a moment of startling recognition, of revelation and even
epiphany—an effect that is premised on the connection between sight and
insight in the Western philosophical tradition, which has imbued vision with
epistemological relevance and made it central to defining the relations of the
self to the world. In the more recent novels at hand, this common trope in
novelistic ekphrasis is not abandoned. Indeed, it frequently represents the
climax in the narratives, when the confrontation of a character with a visual
artwork provides occasion for addressing the issue of significant seeing. With
the upsurge of ekphrasis and its spread to popular narratives in recent years,
ekphrastic encounters are still significant moments elevated above the flow
of narrative and climactic experiences for the fictional characters, but their
benefit seems to be less internal and individualistic in that they perform
416
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/403/528934/0390403.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 15 ──
more communicative, intersubjective functions, in tune with current ideals of
interpersonal relationality and connectivity.
In The Center of the World such a response is reinforced by the emotional
appeal of the melodramatic encounters with the magic portrait of Helen,
which transforms characters into better versions of themselves. For the main
characters, the experience of the painting is one of conversion: even callous
old rakes and hardened businessmen become kind and considerate under its
continued influence. Though the story of the lost masterpiece resonates in the
voices of multiple narrators, the multiple perspectives ultimately accumulate
to suggest the moral impact of the painting, which remains the same across
many individuals and centuries. This universal reaction is contained in the
reiterated phrase of looking “into the heart of things” (van Essen 2013: 11): a
realization of the beauty and blessedness of human life, an increase in empa-
thetic understanding and an acceptance of ethical, interpersonal responsi-
bility. None of these reactions can be associated with the convention of the
male gaze directed at a female nude, the icon of gendered seeing. Instead
of objectifying vision, the fictional characters achieve more interconnected,
relational insights. With these romantic, idealist ideas, the novel promotes the
revival of moral sentimentalism and an “ethics of caring,” ascribing to art-
works a beneficial and educative effect. This seems to be part of a larger
ethical turn in popular fictions to connect art with social outcomes such as
changed attitudes, improved motives, and aspirations to greater humani-
tarianism (Nussbaum 1992).
In tune with this agenda, recent fictions often present encounters with art
as an opportunity for calling attention to the dignity and value of margin-
alized perceptions, and for rendering gazes reciprocal and mutually respect-
ful, undermining the typical power imbalances that scopic regimes have
accustomed us to, thus acting as a trigger for other-directed empathy. The
narrative act of ekphrasis can address the protagonists’ marginality by allow-
ing outsiders to become the mouthpieces of a visual object and to avail them-
selves of it as a symbol of their condition, resulting in emotionally charged
encounters with art that enrich the reader’s emotional experience as well.
By staging the subversive glance of disadvantaged perceivers, who explicitly
refuse to be representatives of conventional ways of seeing and who reject the
culture’s evaluative norms, ekphrasis can contribute to a reconceptualization
of seeing as “intersubjective” and “interpersonal” (Bryson 2001: 9).
This is the case in Ali Smith’s novel How to Be Both (2014), where the two
central protagonists suffer on account of their unclear sexuality. This gender
trouble, which is the source of the reader’s emotional involvement with the
characters, is also productive of a tension between an official version and a
personal take on visual representation. On one level of the plot, the Renais-
Brosch
† Ekphrasis in Recent Popular Novels
417
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/403/528934/0390403.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 16 ──
sance painter Francesco del Cossa is really a girl cross-dressing as a man to
make a career in painting. In the other half of the novel, del Cossa’s paintings
are inspected by the twenty-first-century main character, sixteen-year-old
George (short for Georgia), who must in the course of events come to terms
with her mother’s death. The novel invents a life for the historical artist del
Cossa plus a ghostly afterlife in which he observes the contemporary char-
acters. This double-take not only questions chronologies but inserts a per-
sonal level into both time frames (Smith 2014: 234–40).
Visiting Italy with her two children, George’s mother tells them how art
restorers sometimes find underdrawings that differ significantly from the final
painted image. “Which came first?” she asks, and George answers that it is
the drawing below the paint. “But the first thing we see,” her mother coun-
ters, “and most times the only thing we see, is the one on the surface. So does
that mean it comes first after all?” (ibid.: 289). This conversation comes late in
the novel, if one happens to read the version where the contemporary plot
comes second. But this is a matter of chance, since the book consists of two
parts, both numbered “One”; half the copies are printed with George’s
portion of the narrative first, the other half with Francesco’s. How to Be
Both thus refers to the complex interrelations between the past and the pres-
ent, the original and the rewriting, male and female, the whole and the parts,
and significantly, the image and its meaning. “The picture makes you look at
both—the close-up happening and the bigger picture” (ibid.: 239).
Very little is known about the artist del Cossa, and few of his works survive.
His responsibility for three phantasmagorical wall panels in the Room of the
Months of the Palazzo Schifanoia was forgotten until historians discovered a
letter of protest the painter wrote to the duke who commissioned the work,
a detail Smith incorporates into her story. Somewhat anachronistically he
becomes the voice for articulating a contemporary aesthetics of simultaneous
illusion and deconstruction: “I like very much a foot, say, or a hand, coming
over the edge and over the frame into the world beyond the picture, cause a
picture is a real thing in the world and this shift is a marker of this reality”
(ibid.: 121).
In the storyworld, Francesco is ordered to celebrate the duke’s generosity
and splendor by connecting the “peaceable and prosperous world he has
made to the cosmic order” (ibid.: 110). The three frescoes visible in the real
palazzo feature elaborate secular allegories involving classical gods and the
signs of the zodiac. As Laura Miller contends, “A lot of these images appear
enigmatic to the modern eye, now that the coded meanings have been for-
gotten, but that doesn’t lessen their appeal. Despite allegory’s reputation as a
simplistic technique, it is in fact the quintessential storytelling way of being
both; rich on the surface and replete with layers of underlying significance”
418
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/403/528934/0390403.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 17 ──
(Miller 2014: n.p.). The lack of art-historical knowledge about the paintings
and their creator makes them good examples of the convergence of the
notional and the actual, and the blurring of the historical and the contem-
porary. How to Be Both makes use of their semantic indeterminacy by annexing
the images for presentist readings.
Like The Center of the World, Smith’s novel engages with what art may do to
transform those who encounter it and those who make it, celebrating the act
of seeking to understand the other. On one level of the plot, the Renaissance
artist crosses the temporal border and enters the contemporary world as a
ghost hoping to help the mourning girl. Similarly, the girl’s mother gives a
reading of the fresco that is an astounding example of empathy across cul-
tures and ages. She understands that del Cossa painted his own face onto a
worker in rags who is “the most virile and powerful figure in the whole room,
much more so than the Duke,” and intuits that the painter was a female cross-
dresser (Smith 2014: 296–97). While she herself is the subject of the painter’s
empathetic ghostly attention, the girl George recovers from grieving through
remembering her dead mother’s empathetic readings of the artist. Without
crude didacticism, art is represented as creating intersubjective and empa-
thetic connections across strict ontological divides. Ultimately, ekphrasis
moves the characters beyond the binary relationship of viewing subject and
perceived object, and by extension from their isolation as marginal characters
to engagement with others.
6. Conclusion: Reauratizing Images
We have seen that on the level of individual response, ekphrasis is an inten-
sifier, enriching the reading experience visually and in an embodied way.
Preferring to look at “serious” artworks, popular novels use them to offer
readers a contemplative mental space. This imaginative enhancement works
best when ekphrastic writing is attached to subjective seeing, mediating a
subjective perception in the storyworld for readers and making the fictional
experience available to them. At the level of the reader’s experientiality, then,
ekphrasis performs functions ranging from enhanced visualization to refresh-
ing cultural memory, generating affect and emotion as pathways to empathy,
and finally reflecting on culturally privileged ways of seeing. The latter informs
a wider cultural environment, where ekphrasis is a shapeshifter adjusting the
appearance and meaning of cultural icons and topoi to enhance their rele-
vance to cultural memory and contemporary ethical purposes.
Responding to the shifting ground of present-day material culture and its
basis in economic market forces, literature seems to want to assure itself of its
place in a prestigious shared tradition. Thematizing the visual arts can dignify
Brosch
† Ekphrasis in Recent Popular Novels
419
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/403/528934/0390403.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 18 ──
a fictional text. Recent ekphrasis seems keen to imitate the broad outreach of
popular museum culture, sometimes annexing for the novel some of the pres-
tige of canonical artworks, sometimes pointing the reader to visual memo-
rabilia otherwise neglected. Even in the case of notional ekphrasis, references
to art borrow from its prestige and the esteem in which it is held. This text-
image relation is not one-sided but reciprocal. Artworks as well as the novels
that contain them receive surplus value from the immediacy and powerful
appeal of textual visuality and from the new meanings, contemporary issues,
and themes inscribed into the ekphrastic object.
In the face of the enormous technological changes governing our relations
to images, it may seem surprising that many recent novels’ ekphrases uphold
traditional concepts of art, reiterating claims for the “magic of art” or the
“power of images.” The confrontation of a viewer with a work of art is an
occasion for negotiating two culturally determined conventions: pictorialism
and the appreciative aesthetic spectatorship appropriate for art, on the one
hand, and the imitation of an individualized perception, perhaps warped or
misled, but subjective in any case, on the other. In creating a response to
visual art, the novels under discussion make the most of the tension between
these two modes of seeing. An individual emotional reaction to an artwork
permits narrative dramatization, while the gaze of aesthetic awe and admi-
ration is based on a premise of the sublime power of art. The ekphrastic
moment of looking takes place at the intersection of these different ways of
seeing.
Ekphrastic art-objects are commonly designed to be powerful agents, act-
ing upon the fictional characters in compelling ways. Since the point is to
assure readers of art’s stunning impact, the seductive rhetorical promise and
defamiliarized visuality of artworks frequently combine forces in recent nov-
els to elevate the moment of ekphrasis into a revelation of moral insight for
fictional characters. Contemporary narratives seem to be committed to nar-
rative strategies that empower the artwork in the text by making it the focus of
highlighted visualization, melodramatic subjective experience, and the desire
of fictional agency, as well as the pivot of narrative events. These narrative
strategies work in the interest of “reauratizing” art; they keep alive the endur-
ing linkage between ekphrasis and epiphany, which has been one of the
elements of ekphrastic writing since Romanticism. Through these strategies,
ekphrastic novels maintain the myth of art’s spirituality and transformative
potential. Yet they also add a new twist to the celebration of the power of art
by attributing to it not only epistemological benefit, but restorative and
ethical effect as well.
In short, ekphrastic defamiliarizing of artworks feeds into remythologizing
them. The novels are rewritings of images with new meanings, in which
420
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/403/528934/0390403.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 19 ──
different reading frames and world pictures are correlated. In this way,
ekphrasis makes use of images to stimulate the reader’s imagination and
creative participation in the construction of new meanings. Such engagement
on the part of the audience not only enables interpretations, but can also lead
to a questioning of cultural axioms. These possibilities for intervention are
exploited in recent novels typically in the interest of a more inclusive, more
interpersonal ethics of connectedness and relationality. Given this reflexive
challenge and ethical aim, it is unsurprising that they remain loyal to or even
dependent on received ideas about the power of art.
References
Assmann, Jan
2005 [1992] Das kulturelle Geda¨chtnis: Schrift, Erinnerung und politische Identita¨t in fru¨hen Hochkulturen
(Munich: Beck).
Auyoung, Elaine
2015 “Rethinking the Reality Effect: Detail and the Novel.” In The Oxford Handbook of Cognitive
Literary Studies, edited by Lisa Zunshine, 581 – 92 (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Boxall, Peter
2013 Twenty-First Century Fiction: A Critical Introduction (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press).
Brosch, Renate
2013 “Reading and Visualisation,” Anglistik: Focus on Reception and Reader Response 24, no. 2:
169 – 80.
2015 “Images in Narrative Literature: Cognitive Experience and Iconic Moments.” In
Handbook of Intermediality: Literature, Image, Sound, Music, edited by Gabriele Rippl, 343 – 60
(Berlin: De Gruyter).
Bryson, Norman
1983 Vision and Painting: The Logic of the Gaze (Basingstoke: Macmillan Press).
2001 “Introduction: Art and Intersubjectivity.” In Looking In: The Art of Viewing, edited by
Mieke Bal, 1 – 40 (London: Routledge).
Chevalier, Tracy
1999 Girl with a Pearl Earring (London: HarperCollins).
Cole, Teju
2011 Open City (New York: Random House).
Collins, Christopher
1991 Reading the Written Image: Verbal Play, Interpretation, and the Roots of Iconophobia (University
Park: Pennsylvania State University Press).
Collins, Jim
2010 Bring on the Books for Everybody: How Literary Culture Became Popular Culture (Durham, NC:
Duke University Press).
Devereux, Kim
2015 Rembrandt’s Mirror (London: Atlantic Books).
Esrock, Ellen J.
1994 The Reader’s Eye: Visual Imaging as Reader Response (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press).
Freedberg, David
1989 The Power of Images: Studies in the History and Theory of Response (Chicago: Chicago Uni-
versity Press).
Brosch
† Ekphrasis in Recent Popular Novels
421
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/403/528934/0390403.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 20 ──
Heffernan, James A. W.
1993 Museum of Words. The Poetics of Ekphrasis from Homer to Ashbery (Chicago: Chicago Uni-
versity Press).
Hustvedt, Siri
2014 The Blazing World (London: Sceptre).
Krieger, Murray
1992 [1967] “Ekphrasis, or the Still Movement of Poetry; or Laokoon Revisited.” In Ekphra-
sis: The Illusion of the Natural Sign, 263 – 88. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Lubbock, Tom
2006 “Fabritius, Carel: The Goldfinch (1654),” The Independent, September 15, www
.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/art/great-works/fabritius-carel-the-goldfinch
-1654-744406.html.
Meek, Richard
2009 Narrating the Visual in Shakespeare (Farnham: Ashgate).
Miller, Laura
2014 “How to Be Both by Ali Smith Review — Playful, Tender, Unforgettable,” Guardian,
September 13, www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/13/how-to-be-both-ali-smith
-review-novel.
Mitchell, W. J. T.
1994 Picture Theory (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Nussbaum, Martha C.
1992 “‘Finely Aware and Richly Responsible’: Literature and the Moral Imagination.” In
Love’s Knowledge: Essays on Literature and Philosophy, edited by Martha Nussbaum, 148 – 67
(Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Otis, Laura
2015 “The Value of Qualitative Research for Cognitive Literary Studies.” In The Oxford
Handbook of Cognitive Literary Studies, edited by Lisa Zunshine, 505 – 24 (Oxford: Oxford
University Press).
Peretz, Evgenia
2014 “It’s Tartt — But Is It Art?,” Vanity Fair, June 11, www.vanityfair.com/culture/2014
/07/goldfinch-donna-tartt-literary-criticism.
Reavey, Paula
2011 “The Return to Experience: Psychology and the Visual.” In Visual Methods in Psychology:
Using and Interpreting Images in Qualitative Research, edited by Paula Reavey, 1 – 14 (Hove:
Psychology Press).
Richardson, Alan
2011 “Defaulting to Fiction: Neuroscience Rediscovers the Romantic Imagination,” Poetics
Today 32, no. 4: 663 – 92.
Rothschild, Hannah
2015 The Improbability of Love (London: Bloomsbury).
Scarry, Elaine
1996 “Die Lebhaftigkeit der Vorstellung: Der Unterschied zwischen Tagtraum und ange-
leiteter Phantasie.” In Texte und Lektu¨ren: Perspektiven in der Literaturwissenschaft, edited by
Aleida Assmann, 156 – 87 (Frankfurt: Fischer).
2001 [1999] Dreaming by the Book (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press).
Schwend, Joachim
2012 “The Museum — A Site of Memory in Consumer Cultures.” In The Museal Turn, edited
by Sabine Coelsch-Foisner and Douglas Brown, 19 – 33 (Heidelberg: Winter).
Smith, Ali
2014 How to Be Both (London: Penguin).
422
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/403/528934/0390403.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 21 ──
Starr, Gabrielle
2015 “Theorizing Imagery, Aesthetics, and Doubly-Directed States.” In The Oxford Handbook
of Cognitive Literary Studies, edited by Lisa Zunshine, 246 – 72 (Oxford: Oxford University
Press).
Tartt, Donna
2013 The Goldfinch (London: Little, Brown).
van Essen, Thomas
2013 The Center of the World (New York: Other Press).
Vermeule, Blakey
2010 Why Do We Care about Literary Characters? (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press).
Webb, Ruth
2009 Ekphrasis, Imagination, and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Practice (Farnham: Ashgate).
Whitfield, Ian
2014 “The Blazing World,” ArtReview May, artreview.com/reviews/may_2014_book
_review_the_blazing_world_by_siri_hustvedt/.
Wood, James
2013 “The New Curiosity Shop: Donna Tartt’s The Goldfinch,” New Yorker, October 21, www
.newyorker.com/magazine/2013/10/21/the-new-curiosity-shop.
Brosch
† Ekphrasis in Recent Popular Novels
423
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/403/528934/0390403.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025
