# Ekphrasis in the Digital Age
# Source: Brosch - 2018 - Ekphrasis in the Digital Age.pdf
# BibTeX key: brosch_ekphrasis_2018-1
# Zotero dir: 3113
# Extracted chars: 57565
# Format: PDF
============================================================

── PAGE 1 ──
Ekphrasis in the Digital Age:
Responses to Image
Renate Brosch
University of Stuttgart
Abstract
This introduction briefly surveys the current expansion of ekphrasis in terms
of genres, visual objects, modes of writing, and cues for reader response. Drawing on
suggestions from the subsequent individual essays that provide categories for orga-
nizing the great variety of ekphrases, such as pictured and picture-less, mimetic and
transformed, notional and actual, abbreviated and described, printed and screen,
canonical artwork and non-art image, narrative and poetic ekphrasis, the introduction
further discusses ekphrastic theories with a specific focus on their relevance to its
practices and cultural functions in the present media ecology. Despite its increasing
frequency in recent years, theoretical conceptualizations have largely remained com-
mitted to traditional paradigms, such as competition (“paragone”) and representation
(Heffernan 1993: 1). What appears to be wanting is a revival of rhetorical and perfor-
mative understandings of ekphrasis that can augment theoretical conceptualizations
and bring them into line with the participatory and hybrid practices of ekphrasis today.
Increasingly, what used to be a central aim of ekphrasis — the description of an art-
work — has been replaced by modes of rewriting the artwork and in the process ques-
tioning accepted meanings, values, and beliefs, not just relating to the particular
artwork in question but referencing the ways of seeing and the scopic regimes of the
culture at large. Since these changes in writing and reading practices tend toward
increasing the participation of the reader, a more meta-representational and rhetorical
conceptualization of ekphrasis is desirable. From a functional perspective, I argue that
the traditional purpose of ekphrasis to interrogate ways of seeing has acquired new
urgency in today’s media landscape.
Keywords
digital media, ekphrastic theory, performative, response
Poetics Today 39:2 ( June 2018)
DOI 10.1215/03335372-4324420
q 2018 by Porter Institute for Poetics and Semiotics
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/225/528829/0390225.pdf by guest on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 2 ──
To consider the specifics of ekphrasis at the present time offers a welcome
opportunity to review some of the commonplaces that remain tenaciously
attached to ekphrasis studies. The most tedious of these is a “narrow notion”
( Johnston et al. 2015: 1) of ekphrasis that adheres to its standard definition
as “the verbal representation of visual representation” (Heffernan 1993: 1).
Many theorists now feel that a critical revision of this limited idea of “rep-
resentation of representation” is long overdue (Kennedy 2012: 7). Moreover,
the narrow concept of ekphrasis foregrounds its intermedial quality by insist-
ing on the binary opposition between two sign systems. In introducing visual
culture studies almost three decades ago, W. J. T. Mitchell deconstructed
the dichotomy of the visual and the verbal, claiming that all meaning arises
from the interplay of the visual and the verbal and that all media are mixed
media (Mitchell 1994: 5, 161). If these two modes are always inextricably
mixed, then the above definition by James Heffernan is reductive. A broader
view of ekphrasis would take account of an expanded domain of visual images
available for ekphrastic writing as well as of the fact that it is not a visual
representation being represented but the perception of a visual image that is
translated into verbal form (Barbetti 2011: 11).
By concentrating on recent instances, the present volume shifts the focus
from a difference between sign systems or characteristic features to an interest
in adaptive and collaborative processes. It no longer concentrates on rep-
resentation but rather on cultural performance. This shift in interest and
interpretive frame is occasioned partly by the changes in ekphrastic practice
due to digital technologies and by the attendant need to revise theoretical
considerations. Semiotic or representational considerations are no longer
adequate to what is going on in a large and multifarious field and should
give way to conceptualizations of phenomena like ekphrasis not as static
entities, but as cultural agents with the power to elicit certain effects and to
perform certain functions. By understanding ekphrasis as a performative
gesture, we can avoid the need to specify and thus to circumscribe the visual
content. Such an understanding also productively bypasses the emphasis
on representation that was foregrounded in Heffernan’s well-known, but
increasingly contested definition. A performative approach to cultural anal-
ysis in general understands culture not as a container of works and texts but as
a fluid network of processes and events made up of embodied practices that
impact on society. In other words, this approach avoids a purely media-
centered examination and directs attention to what ekphrastic agency
achieves for the text, the reader, and the wider cultural field (Brosch 2015).
226
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/225/528829/0390225.pdf by guest on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 3 ──
The articles in the present collection share a broad conception of ekphra-
sis, expanding it beyond the traditional centrality of visual art and literature.1
In view of this expansion and the corresponding efforts to expand the theoret-
ical conceptualization, it may be best to imagine a variety of ekphrastic
occurrences along a spectrum or range of differing degrees and types of visu-
al input, varieties of reference, and differences in audience address, such as
Liliane Louvel’s typological contribution provides. David Kennedy’s case
study of an unusual example also makes suggestions for extending the cat-
egories of ekphrasis. Thus, one of the assumptions of the present volume is
that enormous changes have taken place in ekphrastic practice since the
beginning of the twenty-first century. The variety of instances—in traditional
as well as “new” media—makes a comprehensive account in the present
format impossible. Instead, we have brought together critical discussions of
a wide range of different case studies that diverge in their theoretical assump-
tions, too. In order to move beyond a limited art-and-highbrow-literature
framework, many contributions to this volume adopt a functional approach,
as recommended by Gabriele Rippl in a recent handbook on intermediality
(Rippl 2015), an approach which explores the cultural work ekphrasis per-
forms in a particular time and space.
Taking my cue from Emma Kafalenos’s contribution, I suggest a simple
definition of ekphrasis that is oriented toward present-day practices: ekphra-
sis is a literary response to a visual image or visual images. This definition
eschews the reductive notion of a defining set of formal features. While avoid-
ing iconographic specification, it recognizes what must be acknowledged
in the present diversity, that ekphrasis emerges from a mode of articulation
and its interaction with an audience—hence, the definition’s emphasis on
performance and response. At the same time, this definition is able to encom-
pass fully fledged extended instances as well as abbreviated ekphrastic refer-
ences that emerge as mere traces of a visual art work. It describes a process
rather than a one-on-one relation, more specifically a response process that
can take a variety of forms and involve a variety of projections. By naming
a process rather than a state, it respects the double temporality inherent
in ekphrastic references to real historical objects. By emphasizing the per-
formative instead of the mimetic, this definition gestures toward effects at
the level of reception and audience, factors that need to be taken into
account more than they have been by traditional theories.2 Such an approach
relies on an awareness of the audience that looks both ways: toward the
1. Since each article is preceded by an abstract, there is no need to summarize the individual
contributions here.
2. Such an approach was suggested for classical instances of ekphrasis by Simon Goldhill, who
concludes that ekphrasis is part of a system that functions “to produce a cultivated and cultured
Brosch
† Ekphrasis in the Digital Age
227
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/225/528829/0390225.pdf by guest on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 4 ──
public domain in which any form of expression must seek resonance as well
as toward the experiential reading processes in the response to an ekphrastic
text.
To examine this experiential quality means to take into account the per-
suasive function of ekphrasis, its capacity to appeal to an embodied and
emotional response, and thus to consider questions of address and poetic
strategy, platforms of transmission, contexts of articulation and effect, just as
the writers, artists, and other “producers” of ekphrasis themselves do. For a
comprehensive assessment of functions and effects we need to pay attention
to response, and this response is first and foremost an embodied cognitive
reaction (where the “cognitive” includes not only conscious awareness, but
emotional and pre-verbal states as well). However, the analysis of cognitive
processes should not be an end in itself, but rather a pathway toward under-
standing the agency of ekphrasis in the cultural imaginary.
1. Ekphrasis in the Present Media Landscape
It is perhaps a curious phenomenon that ekphrasis exerts a continuing fasci-
nation at the present time, even though the prevalence of images in house-
hold media would seem to have made description superfluous. The last two
or three decades have seen an endless supply and demand of images, whose
ready availability on the World Wide Web changes practices and expec-
tations regarding the visual. In 1996 Jay David Bolter claimed that “the
breakout of the visual in contemporary prose and multimedia is a denial of
ekphrasis. Popular prose and multimedia are striving for the natural sign in the
realm of the visual rather than through heightened verbal expression” (Bolter
1996: 265). Recalling an older argument put forward by Murray Krieger,
Bolter perceives a contemporary dominance of the virtual and the visual.
Similarly, Marie-Laure Ryan predicted a few years later that ekphrasis would
become redundant: “in an advanced VR [virtual reality] system there will be
no need for ekphrasis—the verbal description of a visual artwork—because the
system will encompass all forms of representation, action and signification”
(Ryan 2001: 60–61). However, at the present moment, the reverse is the case:
the frequency of ekphrasis has increased rather than decreased in the last two
and a half decades. In spite of what is often considered a visual overabun-
dance on the World Wide Web, ekphrastic occurrences are surprisingly
citizen of Empire, who knows how . . . to play the game of competitive self-scrutiny as a per-
former of culture” (Goldhill 2007: 19).
228
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/225/528829/0390225.pdf by guest on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 5 ──
prevalent in recent novels, poems, short stories, and in drama, with no signs of
remission.
Could it be that ekphrasis, far from being a minor and outmoded phe-
nomenon in older literary texts, has acquired a particular relevance to our
current cultural debates? One reason to explain the continuing interest
in ekphrasis may be the very prevalence of images, given that ekphrasis
responds to and participates in the culture of images. Something in ekphrasis
must still speak to its recipients in a way that reproductions do not, and that
increases their appeal and pertinence. Elizabeth Loizeaux suggests as much
when she remarks that the availability of images in the digital age has actually
increased their fascination, or at least that of certain kinds of images (Loi-
zeaux 2008: 3). This observation can point two ways: on the one hand,
because images are everywhere, to evoke them is to create a shared knowl-
edge platform, from which to open communication. Individual memory has
recourse to almost unlimited storage systems nowadays, which make a vast
amount of pictorial material recognizable for web users transnationally. This
aspect of an enlarged cultural memory of images would explain instances of
ekphrasis that facilitate imagination via abbreviation; the mere mention of an
iconic image ensures shared visualization. On the other hand, the omnipres-
ence of visual images would suggest that they are a little-valued resource, as
is everything that we are free to use without charge or effort. In order to be
especially noticed, some surplus or boost is necessary such as a surprising
combination of visual and verbal can provide. This second aspect captures a
central purpose in ekphrastic writing—the transformation of images to pro-
duce a sense of novelty and defamiliarization.
Obviously for recipients in global media society, where images are acces-
sible everywhere, ekphrasis must have different uses than in former times
when readers were usually unacquainted with the images described. Today’s
readerships encounterart descriptions in a situation of the all-pervading avail-
ability, proliferation, adaptation, and citation of images. The “new media”
circulate content “across different media systems, competing media econo-
mies, and national borders” ( Jenkins 2008: 3). New technological opportu-
nities have brought about new practices and protocols. This is a top-down
technology- and market-driven process as well as a bottom-up consumer-
driven one (ibid.: 18). Visual and audiovisual products travel around the
globe creating migratory images and transcultural horizons of expectation.
The consumption of mass media throughout the world greatly influences
modes of reception of verbal as well as visual events. In the digital era vastly
different media and means of access coexist, while images are constantly
morphing, shape-shifting, and moving into new contexts. According to
Henry Jenkins, one of the effects of this proliferation is “convergence,” that
Brosch
† Ekphrasis in the Digital Age
229
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/225/528829/0390225.pdf by guest on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 6 ──
is, a cultural situation in which producers and users interact in unpredictable
ways (ibid.: 3).
Indeed, most commentators have identified interactivity as the distinguish-
ing characteristic of the new media. In computer-generated graphic environ-
ments the viewer/user does not simply gaze at a virtual world from outside,
but is incorporated into it as an active participant through immersive and
interactive elements. In gaming, for instance, such multisensory experiences
create habits and expectations in terms of emotional and visual effects, which
impact on the dynamic between the viewer/user, the object, and its textual
ekphrasis. The change in media practice has brought about a shift in the
practice of ekphrasis in the digital age, especially with regard to the inter-
action between the image and the viewer. In the most digitally informed
examples of ekphrasis, as discussed in Jolene Mathieson’s article, the user is
asked to take practical action with respect to the text and/or image onscreen.
Since the digital era has produced unprecedented levels of interactivity
with onscreen events, the obsolete notion of a (passive) consumption of mass
media must be abandoned. Interactivity entails a new power over the image
by the viewer who can no longer be termed a recipient or consumer, but must
be understood as an agent in the interrelation: “In the past it was possible to
talk about paintings in terms of what the paintings did or did not represent.
Representation linked cultural production to processes of creation and inten-
tion” (Burnett 2007: 310). This persists, but more sophisticated forms of
participation have become common, allowing viewers, users, and gamers
to immerse themselves in a fictional world and to move around in it. In the
field of media art, the traditional triad of artist, object, and recipient is
replaced by the creator, an interactive process and the participant audience.
These practices encourage people to trust their own imaginative strategies
(ibid.: 331).
Participation in games, hypertexts, and social media has radically changed
our relationship with texts, too, as we encounter the possibility of auton-
omous text production or algorithmic production of fictions (Gervais 2013:
n.p.). In globalized media culture images proliferate; they transcend histori-
cal periods by living on and joining new contexts from a different temporal
origin; they travel across borders and become part of different cultures. The
amorphous and ephemeral kinds of images that our media make available
have little to do with a picture in the sense of a finished artifact. The potential
transformation and distortion of images has a parallel in the demise of the
permanent and fixed text as salient features of our current cultural communi-
cation. The copresence of still or animated images has become a standard
feature of our experience of texts onscreen, as has the presence of distracting
elements with little or no connection to texts and images being viewed. Media
230
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/225/528829/0390225.pdf by guest on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 7 ──
users encounter texts in the worldwide accessibility of the web where they can
end in the mixing pot of a hypertext or be connected with sound, images, and
links to informational databases, thus offering choices of transmission and
digression. Multiple and indeterminate links rather than linear progression
structure reception in the new media. It stands to reason that the random
and digressive receptive behavior encouraged by the World Wide Web pro-
motes different forms of attention as well as different forms of vying for
attention. In short, the current media landscape encourages increasing pro-
duction of multimodal hybrids and more participatory modes of addressing
the audience.
As Tamar Yacobi puts it, the digital availability of images “significantly
expands the possibilities of word-image relationships,” weakening the long-
term dominance of the quoting verbal frame over the visual import and
improving ekphrastic freedom (Yacobi 2013: 17). It seems to be a widespread
feature of ekphrasis in the digital age that great liberties are taken in refer-
encing the visual, especially when the verbal text is accompanied by illus-
trations. Danuta Fjellestad’s contribution to this volume investigates how
these “assemblages” test the limits of ekphrasis. Media-savvy audiences are
more willing to work creatively with limited material and to make far-reach-
ing connections. Mats Jansson shows in his contribution how readers become
active participants in making sense of computer-mediated text-image com-
binations. Due to the influence of digital media, the opposition between what
is seen and what is imagined may be fading as viewers become habituated to
virtual reality (Lindhe´ 2015: 7). Recent ekphrastic writing often empowers the
viewer to hijack images from their global and temporal migration and insert
them into a different context that modifies or alters their meaning. Ekphrasis
can create productive misreadings of visual images, changing the value and
meaning of images in relation to social settings and circumstances. Far from
being just faithful descriptions, ekphrases exploit the “polysemy of images” to
become active players in the game of establishing and changing values (Kafa-
lenos 2012: 27).
Nobody knows how many billions of images are uploaded every day. The
internet has multiplied visual events exponentially and the resulting hyper-
saturation may have diminished images’ capacity to affect viewers. In a sce-
nario of omnipresent images, where traditional works of art as well as the
most banal pictures are reproduced in endless variations and adaptations, it
seems somewhat anachronistic to speak of the power of the image. Ekphrastic
writing offers surprising possibilities for compensating for the diminishing
effect of media. It can perform a conservative intervention in the present
media ecology by recalling an image to memory and reviving cultural knowl-
edge. It can also transform an image to engage in meaningful ways with the
Brosch
† Ekphrasis in the Digital Age
231
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/225/528829/0390225.pdf by guest on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 8 ──
present. In this way, ekphrasis can adapt, recalibrate, and recreate the read-
er’s knowledge. It may be advisable to conceptualize ekphrasis as dialogic
exchange and interaction, in which different reading frames and world pic-
tures are correlated.
2. Theorizing Ekphrasis
Ekphrasis theory in the past remained notoriously detached from theoretical
advances in other areas of literary and cultural studies, neglecting some
important developments in visual culture studies, postcolonial theory, and
cognitive literary studies. Gabriele Rippl’s article in this collection redresses
the customary inattention to postcolonial fiction in ekphrasis studies. The
need for a theoretical reconceptualization is aggravated by some common
misconceptions and misplaced emphases. The first problem is the myopic
focus on semiotic difference in traditional theories. Ever since Lessing’s ratio-
nalist intervention against the ut pictura poesis tradition, emphasis has been
placed on the difference in sign systems and the contrast between the visual
and the verbal. Lessing initiated an enduring binary between the two modes
that has since been prominent in explanations of ekphrasis.
Twentieth-century ekphrastic theory continued to be haunted by binary
oppositions: between sign systems, visual and verbal capacities, art and pop-
ular culture, private and public, cooperation and competition, stasis and
movement, fantastic and realistic, actual and notional, female and male,
identity and alterity, permanence and transience. In semiotic parlance the
difference arises between symbolic and iconic signs, or between conventional
and “natural” representations, or between temporal and spatial arts. While it
often pays lip service to the presumed equality between the parts, ekphrastic
theory commonly emphasizes the competition between two representative
modes, attributing to it an inherent tension (Kneale 2010: 189). The view of
the sign systems as two competitors vying for power informs James Heffer-
nan’s concept of ekphrasis as “paragone,” notwithstanding his equalizing
definition of it as representation of representation (Heffernan 1993: 1). By
reducing visual characteristics to the model of language, structuralist and
semiotic approaches partake of the same implicitly logocentric emphasis on
difference (cf. Clu¨ver 1997: 26).3
Whether they result from the premise of interart rivalry or that of semiotic
differences, these dichotomies in ekphrastic theory are reductive and unhelp-
3. James Elkins recognizes the power of images and the “failure of words to come to terms with
them” (Elkins 1998: 2). Yet, he views ekphrasis as a textual version of “retroactive performa-
tivity,” that is, a deferred reaction to core images that asserts textual authority by rearranging
their meaning and redefining their appeal for contemporary audiences.
232
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/225/528829/0390225.pdf by guest on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 9 ──
ful in dealing with the huge variety of phenomena. Attempts to theorize the
separateness of the visual and verbal testify to Western ideological commit-
ments rather than provide insight into a fundamental difference ( Johnston
et al. 2015: 4). These notions are grounded in implicit assumptions about an
ideal purity in either sign system, which can only be explained as a historical
heritage of the conceptual distance between word and image erected in
the modern age (Boehm 1995: 26). Like all binary oppositions, these breed
inequalities between their respective poles by aligning them with hierar-
chical and powerfully gendered values (Hedley 2009: 24). As Mitchell has
shown, they carry a residue of the iconophobic foundation of Western aes-
thetic theory that identifies the image as the Other of propositional ratio-
nality (Mitchell 1986: 46). Initiating visual culture studies’ focus on implicit
power relations in theory and practice, Mitchell stressed the inherently tex-
tual nature of ekphrasis and the concomitant subordination of the images to
verbal frames (ibid.: 3).4 Hence to play down semiotic difference in theoretical
conceptualization cannot mean to deny that word and image have histori-
cally been accorded different weight and value, typically mapped onto sexual
and social difference.
Historically, the word was ennobled by its association with scripture as
opposed to the inherently deceptive image. Bruce Holsinger observes that
ekphrasis has strong claims to being “the most narcissistic mode of literary
discourse” since it constitutes “a mode in and by which literary language
gazes at the visual as a lens upon the beauty of its own performance” (Hol-
singer 2005: 75). Ekphrastic writing, especially when it engages with canonical
art objects, often reinstates the traditional hierarchies between the verbal and
the visual in order to question or criticize the value-laden beliefs associated
with them. One of its most powerful instruments lies in exploiting the contrast
between two different forms of expression to symbolize or evoke alterity and
Otherness. The ekphrastic encounter can be used to stage a conflict or an
attraction between unequal parts and to comment on the cultural inheritance
of inequality.
Theoretical logocentrism is no longer adequate to contemporary media
culture’s displacement of the privileged position of the text. This is evident
in the innovative poetics at the core of the intermedial poetry interpreted
by Jessica Bundschuh in this volume. The enduring tradition of more or less
4. In proclaiming the “pictorial turn,” Mitchell in the 1980s assumed that with the acceptance
of semiotics, the visual and the verbal would be regarded on a basis of equality, that interpre-
tation would be concerned with images as much as with texts, and that the visual would be
accorded the same amount of weight and significance in analysis. In fact, the establishment of
visual culture studies as a separate academic field of cultural studies was largely a reaction
against the enduring privilege accorded to texts and verbal representations.
Brosch
† Ekphrasis in the Digital Age
233
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/225/528829/0390225.pdf by guest on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 10 ──
disguised hierarchy cannot do justice to the plurality of imagistic and picto-
rial contributions to today’s multimodal hybrids. Instead, one can conceive
of ekphrasis as a complex interactive process of cooperation. Supplementing
the ideas of opposites and competition with one of collaboration can help
us update Mitchell’s unfinished project. According to the insights of neuro-
science, words and images are alternative but interacting cognitive strategies.
The writer, the text, the image, and the reader participate in this coopera-
tion, though none of them singly determines the outcome. Rather, the inter-
action must be appreciated for its ability to give rise to an epistemological
blend, a “pictorial third” that emerges through the three-way interaction
(Louvel 2010: 230). This ekphrastic blend or “third” converges in the perfor-
mative deictic gesture with which ekphrasis stages an imaginative gaze to
make something visible that was not visible before (Boehm 1995: 30). Its
second-order seeing acts persuasively on the individual visualization and,
at the same time, exposes the cultural determinants that distribute visibility
and opacity. These qualities of ekphrasis rest less in its ability to represent
than in its ability to move its audience ( Johnston et al. 2015: 6).
An “affect-oriented” rather than “object-oriented” approach to ekphrasis
recalls classical Greek and Roman rhetoric, which was interested in produc-
ing immediacy (Cheeke 2008: 3). The Greek word “ekphrasis” comes into
regular usage after its treatment in the Early Empire progymnasmata, where it
was an exercise in vivid presentation of not only visual art objects, but all sorts
of things, such as people, places, and animals (Koelb 2006: 2). With the help
of these elementary rhetorical manuals, students practiced the technique of
prosopopeia, good oratory (ibid.: 4). Its aim of enargeia goes back to Simonides’s
and Horace’s ut pictura poesis claim: the power of images is to be replicated in
the response to words.
Hence, in classical rhetoric the affective goal of energeia can be arrived at
through vivacity or enargeia, which produces an emotional effect in the reci-
pient, who is made to see what is being described. What mattered to the
ancients was “heightened and credible immediacy” (ibid.: 4). Indeed, the
ancient court speeches for which these categories were developed aimed to
turn the assembled citizens into secondary witnesses. The key rhetorical idea
is to make things visible, and for orators ekphrasis always had the broader
meaning of enabling the audience to imagine something (Goldhill 2007: 3). It
is exactly in this imaginative effect that Ruth Webb discovers the enduring
analogy between ekphrasis and the visual arts: they are alike in what they
achieve; they “have the power to create an illusion of presence . . . together
with an awareness of absence” (Webb 2009: 194). As specified by Longinus,
the rhetorical skill of illusion and semblance that can bring something vividly
before the eyes is a power to “persuade” and “enslave” (cf. Goldhill 2007: 4).
234
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/225/528829/0390225.pdf by guest on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 11 ──
What can be productively recuperated from these ancient notions for a
functional-operational approach today is the idea of giving readers and
audiences their due as embodied, sensual, and emotional participants in the
ekphrastic interaction.
Before the enormous increase in instances of pictured ekphrasis and the
general access to images that our media provide, John Hollander proposed a
distinction regarding the reality status of the visual object of ekphrasis, which
is either real and existing outside the text or imaginary but visualizable. He
called the corresponding types “actual” and “notional” ekphrasis (Hollander
1995: 7). Notional ekphrasis—that is, description of imagined art—was prac-
tically the only form found in literature until techniques of reproduction and
opportunities for public display became common.5 These historical changes
notwithstanding, Hollander regarded the two forms as operating on different
ontological levels: actual ekphrasis references the real, notional ekphrasis, by
contrast, belongs to the category of the imaginary; its invention of an image
to be visualized in the reader’s mind partaking of the same dependence on
context and convention that any fictional world-making does. Hollander did
not mention the possibility of a zone of overlap when works of art have been
lost or become inaccessible and an earlier description written from direct
experience is now notional in effect. In light of ekphrasis’s long tradition of
circumventing the attempt at verisimilitude, Hollander perhaps overstated
the difference, which appears less pertinent to the current media landscape.
In contrasting “printed ekphrasis” with “computer ekphrasis,” Cecilia
Lindhe´ suggests that it is no longer appropriate to maintain Hollander’s
ontological separation between notional and actual ekphrasis. The blurring
of boundaries is particularly evident in VR environments where the perfor-
mative element can be acted out in live interactions and where viewers are
involved spatially and not just visually (Lindhe´ 2015: 10). The current ubiq-
uity and familiarity of certain images will aid visualization by providing
prototypes for evoking images even in nonspecific description. Like actual
ekphrasis, notional ekphrasis is dependent on cultural memory and the store-
house of images that corresponds to it in the individual mind. But neither
need respect the schemata and prototypes they evoke; they may also question
or subvert them.
The obsolete definition of ekphrasis as “the literary description of works of
visual art” (Bolter and Grusin 2000: 45) derives from a mistaken identification
5. A verbal treatment of identifiable paintings became expedient with the display of pictures in
public exhibition spaces after the founding of the Royal Academy of Art in 1768 and the birth
of the public museum. The invention of photography and effective print reproduction later
increased the frequency of such appeals to the readership’s prior knowledge and memory
(Heffernan 1993: 93).
Brosch
† Ekphrasis in the Digital Age
235
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/225/528829/0390225.pdf by guest on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 12 ──
of ekphrastic writing with description. But this notion falls short of the diver-
sity of phenomena labeled ekphrasis, not only in the present day. It does not
make sense to think of ekphrasis as a purely descriptive mode. This con-
ception resulted from a convenient transfer of the distinctions in sign systems
to distinctions in style or mode of expression. Accordingly, from the idea that
ekphrasis is committed to representing a preexisting visual object, it followed
necessarily that it is primarily descriptive and hence a static element in an
otherwise dynamic narrative.6 Lessing’s preference for poetry as a narrative
art proceeded from the temporal restraint in painting established in the
Renaissance that prohibited figural simultaneity and hence pictorial narra-
tivity, on the assumption that in a picture “we are observing a scene through
the frame from a fixed vantage point at one moment in time” (Steiner 1988:
23).7 This convention—better known under the label of linear perspective—
was naturalized by viewers in the Western world. It was Murray Krieger in
particular who imported Lessing’s distinction into twentieth-century theory,
regarding ekphrasis as a response to pictorial stasis that creates an arrest or
“still” point in an event-driven narrative (Krieger 1992: 266).8 John Hollan-
der also claimed that ekphrasis aspires to a pictorial stasis contrasting with the
temporal succession of verbal art (Hollander 1995: 6).
In recent theories, critics have regarded the descriptive function of ekphra-
sis as largely displaced by more complex and reflexive purposes. For Paola
Spinozzi, ekphrastic passages should be conceived as sites of narrativity from
which rewriting and replotting begins (Spinozzi 2006: 230). The Renaissance
reduction of visual representation to a single moment, which Lessing took for
granted, liberated ekphrastic writers to invent new plots that enlarge the
meaning and emotional effect of pictures. And this narrative strategy is still
relevant in an era of global hypervisuality as it can offer a space of resistance
to dominant visuality from the viewer’s perspective (Brosch 2008: 195). How-
ever, narrativity is not the only mode of ekphrastic expression, and it is
certainly less prominent in poetry than Spinozzi’s argument about ekphrasis
existing “in symbiosis with narration” suggests (Spinozzi 2006: 229).
6. Recent narratology rejects such a conventional understanding of description as the delin-
eation of a static object because it is more often than not impossible to disentangle narrative and
descriptive elements. Description should be redefined as including narrative and interdepen-
dent with narrativity (Friedmann 2005: 194).
7. Because of the prohibition on the repetition of figural subjects, artists had to invent forms like
frieze, triptych, narrative path, or comic strip in order to achieve narrativity. And spectators
had to learn the imaginative response to these single-moment-images, to read a single scene in
the projective manner described by Lessing. They learnt, in other words, to see a depiction of
momentariness through the lens of narrativity (Steiner 1988: 21).
8. In a later book, Krieger takes a different approach by claiming that ekphrastic language can
satisfy the human desire for a natural and unmediated sign (Krieger 1992: 110).
236
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/225/528829/0390225.pdf by guest on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 13 ──
Taking the performative conception to its logical conclusion means, how-
ever, that the dialectic of movement and arrest must retain some validity.
Although Lessing’s and Krieger’s binary opposition between still art and
dynamic literature—and by analogy between description and narration—
has to be abandoned, there remains an important dimension of ekphrasis
where the idea of a narrative pause is valid and significant, namely on the
levelof individualreaderly experience.In its conspicuousstagingof an observ-
er’s gaze, the performative function of ekphrasis appeals to the reader’s pro-
cessing imagination in a way that suspends attention—an effect that surely
plays a role in its current resurgence.
At the level of individual response, the processing of texts involves embod-
ied, quasi-sensory visualizations that can be related to the separate brain
areas for action-perception and object-perception respectively (Clark 2008:
2). Visual elements in texts appeal to embodied experience, they are
anchored in sensori-motor perceptions of the real world, and their reception
recalls the experiential parameters of perceptions in everyday life. Ekphrastic
practices tend to integrate and promote contrasting forms of response to
visual images. Prominent among these is a focus on a series of emotional
reactions characterized by visual absorption and arrested attention, such as
wonder, joy, surprise, and awe. It appears that ekphrasis works for the reader
by harnessing both the power of the still image and that of dynamic imagi-
native visualization, since both are effective strategies of capturing attention.
Introducing a narrative into the presentation of a visual object utilizes the
appealing qualities of stories, that is, it prompts a dynamic visualization that
mobilizes the image imaginatively, yields immersive experiences, and grat-
ifies readers’ desire to make an image their own through embodied imagi-
nation. Another option of ekphrastic writing is the production of startling
images that freeze or at least slow down the flow of the receptive process and
gratify the reader’s desire for close scrutiny and control. Though ekphrasis
utilizes both these options and is able to combine them, thus mobilizing the
projecting imagination and evoking the framing control, it is freeze-frame
images that may be able to make a more lasting and memorable impression
on the reading mind. Especially for contemporary readers used to the dizzy-
ing electronic speed of digital information, the contemplative mental space
created by an ekphrastic slow-down of narrative pace may offer an imagina-
tive enhancement.
In short, ekphrasis prompts visualization processes on the part of the read-
er. On the one hand, this means that it triggers mental images that are
anchored in sensori-motor perceptions of the real world and can therefore
elicit an enactive, emotional response. The capacity to visualize relies on the
experiential parameters of actual orientation in the real world. It is nourished
Brosch
† Ekphrasis in the Digital Age
237
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/225/528829/0390225.pdf by guest on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 14 ──
by the recollection of images resulting from sensual perception that are stored
in the writer and reader alike (van Eck 2015: 35). On the other hand, visu-
alization is grounded in cultural knowledge, a knowledge stored in the mind
in visual schemata and scripts which are automatically recalled when making
sense of a text. This aspect of visualization links it to the cultural visuality
in which each individual participates; it has political implications because
meaning-making is an activity that always occurs within a preexisting social
field and within actual power relations (Brosch 2013). In analyzing ekphrastic
writing, it is advisable to consider how it aims to manipulate embodied
responses in its efforts to dramatize a moment of viewing. But it is just as
crucial to scrutinize critical responses, since ekphrasis typically interrogates
culturally determined habits of seeing.
Both appellative and critical responses help furnish contemporary ekphra-
sis with a continued attraction at a time of ubiquitous availability of images.
An affective embodied resonance can be effectively cued by suggesting a
mood or feeling associated with the visual object. Ekphrasis often does this
by inserting an emotionally affected observer confronted with sparse but
carefully selected details, which serve as building blocks for a personal vision.
Most ekphrastic passages do not tell us so much what an image looks like
exactly as describe its affective impact in order to provide tinted lenses that
may color our own visualization of it. It may be impossible to match the
transparency of computer images and video games, but literary writing can
activate a mode of visuality that is emotionally rather than sensuously vivid.
This goal of ekphrasis, whether pursued by purely textual means or comple-
mented by illustrations, aims at creating emotional effects that would be
difficult to replicate by purely visual means.
Ekphrasis’s most appealing strategy is “writing seeing.” Emma Kafalenos
refers to this aspect of it in her contribution to this volume, which expands her
earlier explanation of the inevitable misrepresentation of ekphrasis by includ-
ing what she calls “perspectival montage.” As Simon Goldhill puts it, what is
dramatized in ekphrastic poetry is a moment of looking in which description
is subordinate to the “work of responding” (Goldhill 2007: 2). This emphasis
on the performance of a gaze seems to me an important addition to the
concept of ekphrasis. This conceptualization is supported by Jas Elsner
who understands ekphrasis as both an enabler and an occluder: it enables
“in helping the viewers it is training to see,” and it occludes “in the veil of
words with which it screens and obscures the purported visual object” (Elsner
2007: 68). Given ekphrasis’s “self-awareness of both these qualities (enabling
and occluding), then one might say that its true subject is not the verbal
depiction of a visual object but, rather, the verbal enactment of the gaze
that tries to relate with and penetrate the object” (ibid.: 68).
238
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/225/528829/0390225.pdf by guest on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 15 ──
As mentioned earlier, ekphrasis affects not only the individual reader’s
supplementary imagination, but also addresses a cognitive framework that is
not entirely personal and subjective but composed of the semantic memory of
visual images that proliferate in a particular culture. Especially when it deals
with canonical works of art, ekphrasis runs up against a cultural paradigm
that cannot be overestimated, namely the gaze of art appreciation practiced
in the museum since the eighteenth century. As evaluated by Norman Bry-
son, Western classical perspective constructed a type of gaze that negated and
suppressed the embodied subjectivity of the viewer and devised a concept of
subjectivity that depended on “objective” spectatorship. According to Bry-
son, this type of gaze appropriates and penetrates the seen object while
remaining aloof in order to extract a “second surface” of meaning from
behind the appearance of visual art (Bryson 1983: 96). This mode of seeing
is a discursive and pictorial construction, as far removed from the experiential
embodied reality of perception as possible. Yet, in spite of its critical rejection,
ekphrastic writing has made pervasive use of the “vigilant, masterful” Car-
tesian gaze with its arrested vision (ibid.: 96), in order to stage and address
patriarchal and imperial ways of seeing in Western culture.9 This model of
seeing, derived from the legacies of art history, has dominated Western
culture for so long that ekphrastic writing can depend on its being ingrained
knowledge. In commenting on the gaze within painting, writing about paint-
ing can wield a powerful weapon of anti-hierarchical argument (Elsner
2007: 109).
The staged gaze in ekphrasis, by directing the affective subjectivity of a
viewer toward a chosen object, frames and guides the reader’s/visualizer’s
interpretive gaze. In this way standard constructions of viewing are often vio-
lently disrupted and disturbed. Frequently the imagined observer explicitly
refuses to be a representative of conventional ways of seeing and rejects his
or her culture’s evaluative norms. As numerous studies of classical, medieval,
and modern ekphrasis have argued, ekphrastic writing has always included a
transformational element, whether deliberately or not. The particular ten-
sion and unresolvability inherent in ekphrasis predestines it for intervention
into conventions and habits of seeing. Today’s breakdown of boundaries
between high and low and the skepticism about the validity of a canon has
further promoted transformative ekphrastic writing. By describing the per-
ception of an image that clashes with its conventional interpretation, mis-
reads the content, rearranges the meaning, or invents a new one, ekphrasis
9. As Emily Troscianko points out, the tendency to conceptualize visual and imaginative expe-
rience as pictorial is an enduring and deep-rooted one. Any attempt to undermine the gaze
must rely on its familiarity and entails the danger of perpetuating it (Troscianko 2013: 57).
Brosch
† Ekphrasis in the Digital Age
239
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/225/528829/0390225.pdf by guest on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 16 ──
can question and subvert dominant ways of seeing. These iconoclastic ges-
tures contribute to contemporary culture, at one and the same time utilizing
and reinforcing the power of images and undermining their acknowledged
meanings or messages.
It appears that one of ekphrasis’s prominent functions in recent literature
is to interrogate dominant visual regimes: “Literary allusions to pieces of
visual art necessarily carry, in their very structure, a highly charged self-
reflexive potential” (Klarer 2005: 133). The meta-representational potential
that ekphrasis inherently possesses predestines it to disclose the values, belief
systems, and assumptions underlying our concepts of the verbal and the visual
and, in particular, to shed light on the historical and cultural contingency of
ways of seeing, as self-reflexivity can help unravel the status of the visual in a
literary culture. It may even contribute to an ethical reconceptualization of
seeing as “intersubjective” and “interpersonal” instead of governed by West-
ern imperial and patriarchal power structures. Deploying the subversive
potential of ekphrastic meta-representation, feminist literature and postco-
lonial writing have exposed and rejected the Othering gaze of existing power
structures. Ekphrastic writing can stage ways of seeing through subaltern
perceivers; it can create a distinctive female aesthetic that rejects the patri-
archal gaze (Hedley 2009: 25), and it can turn the colonial gaze so that Euro-
centric visual practices are negated (Rippl 2015).
Any assumed position of power over the production of visuality is subject
to constant struggle and renegotiation. Ekphrasis can be a means of inter-
vention in this ongoing power struggle. Writers “resort to it to get the image
to speak to their own preoccupations” (Hedley 2009: 17). Through their par-
ticular agendas, ekphrastic writers construct alternative projects for seeing,
attempting to activate images in order to denaturalize and estrange them,
often in a way that is humorous and disconcerting at the same time, produc-
ing new modes of imaginary perception. They can sketch out a new interplay
between what we obstinately refuse to see and what we desire to see. Thus
they make the reader confront perceptions of what is customary, normal, and
taken for granted as well as desirable or disturbing.
In performing these tasks, ekphrasis can be not only transformative but
transgressive. Its descriptions of seeing, its delineation of gazes open subjec-
tivity out into a social world. Ekphrastic writers can transform a personal
perspective on an object into a new public context of value (Loizeaux 2008:
5). Hence, ekphrasis is performative not just on the individual but also on the
social level. By making ways of seeing visible, thereby challenging cultural
conventions of seeing, ekphrasis can become ethical or political. According
to David Kennedy, this tendency is complemented by readers, who want
ekphrasis to function as moral prolepsis by addressing the anxieties of the
240
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/225/528829/0390225.pdf by guest on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 17 ──
present moment (Kennedy 2012: 4–5). The global spread of digital mass
media allows previously marginalized groups to participate in this process
(Goshe 2011: 17–18). In the global interconnectedness of the digital age,
ekphrasis can transcend the limited boundaries of nation or social group. It
remains for us critics to do it justice with an ethical criticism and theory.
Works Cited
Barbetti, Claire
2011 Medieval Visions: A New Discussion of Interarts Theory (New York: Palgrave Macmillan).
Boehm, Gottfried
1995 “Bildbeschreibung: U¨ ber die Grenzen von Bild und Sprache.” In Beschreibungskunst —
Kunstbeschreibung, edited by Gottfried Bo¨hm and Helmut Pfotenhauer, 23 – 40 (Munich:
Fink).
Bolter, Jay David
1996 “Ekphrasis, Virtual Reality, and the Future of Writing.” In The Future of the Book, edited
by Geoffrey Nunberg, 253 – 72 (Berkeley: University of California Press).
Bolter, Jay David, and Richard Grusin
2000 Remediation: Understanding New Media (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
Brosch, Renate
2008 “Empowering the Spectator: Ekphrasis as Strategic Response to the Power of Images.”
In Symbolism: An International Annual of Critical Aesthetics 8: Ut Pictura Poesis: Literature and
Painting, edited by Daniela Carpi, 179 – 196 (Brooklyn: AMS Press).
2013 “Reading and Visualisation,” Anglistik 24: 169 – 80.
2015 “Images in Narrative Literature: Cognitive Experience and Iconic Moments.” In Hand-
book of Intermediality: Literature, Sound, Image, Music, edited by Gabriele Rippl, 343 – 60
(Berlin: De Gruyter).
Bryson, Norman
1983 Vision and Painting: The Logic of the Gaze (Basingstoke: Macmillan Press).
2001 “Introduction: Art and Intersubjectivity.” In Looking In: The Art of Viewing, edited by
Mieke Bal, 1 – 40 (London: Routledge).
Burnett, Ron
2007 “Projecting Minds.” In MediaArtHistories, edited by Oliver Grau, 309 – 38 (Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press).
Cheeke, Stephen
2008 Writing for Art: The Aesthetics of Ekphrasis (Manchester: Manchester University Press).
Clark, Andy
2008 “Perception, Action, and Experience: Unraveling the Golden Braid?” Neuropsychologia
47, no. 6: 1460 – 68.
Clu¨ver, Claus
1997 “Ekphrasis Reconsidered: On Verbal Representations of Non-Verbal Texts.” In Inter-
art Poetics: Essays on the Interrelations of the Arts and Media, edited by Ulla Britta Lagerroth,
Hans Lund, and Erik Hedling, 19 – 34 (Amsterdam: Rodopi).
Elkins, James
1998 On Pictures and the Words That Fail Them (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Elsner, Jas
2007 Roman Eyes: Visuality and Subjectivity in Art and Text (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press).
Brosch
† Ekphrasis in the Digital Age
241
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/225/528829/0390225.pdf by guest on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 18 ──
Friedman, Susan Stanford
2005 “Spatial Poetics and Arundhati Roy’s The God of Small Things.” In A Companion to Narrative
Theory, edited by James Phelan and Peter J. Rabinowitz, 192 – 205 (Malden, MA: Black-
well Publishing).
Gervais, Bertrand
2013 “Is There a Text on This Screen? Reading in an Era of Hypertextuality.” In A Com-
panion to Digital Literary Studies, edited by Susan Schreibman and Ray Siemens (Oxford:
Blackwell),
digitalhumanities.org/companion/view?docId¼blackwell/9781405148641
/9781405148641.xml&chunk.id¼ss1 – 5 – 3.
Goldhill, Simon
2007 “What Is Ekphrasis for?” Classical Philology 12: 1 – 19.
Goshe, Bishnupriya
2011 Global Icons: Apertures to the Popular (Durham, NC: Duke University Press).
Hedley, Jane
2009 “Introduction: The Subject of Ekphrasis.” In In the Frame: Women’s Ekphrastic Poetry from
Marianne Moore to Susan Wheeler, edited by Jane Hedley, Nick Halperin, and Willard Spie-
gelman, 15 – 40 (Newark: University of Delaware Press).
Heffernan, James A. W.
1993 Museum of Words: The Poetics of Ekphrasis from Homer to Ashberry (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press).
Hollander, John
1988 “The Poetics of Ekphrasis,” Word and Image 4: 209 – 19.
1995 The Gazer’s Spirit: Poems Speaking to Silent Works of Art (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press).
Holsinger, Bruce
2005 “Lollard Ekphrasis: Situated Aesthetics and Literary History,” Journal of Medieval and
Early Modern Studies 35: 67 – 89.
Jenkins, Henry
2008 Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide (New York: New York University
Press).
Johnston, Andrew, Ethan Knapp, and Margitta Rouse, eds.
2015 “Introduction.” In The Art of Vision: Ekphrasis in Medieval Literature and Culture, 1 – 16
(Columbus: Ohio State University Press).
Kafalenos, Emma
2012 “The Polysemy of Looking: Reading Ekphrasis Alongside Images in Calvino’s Castle of
Crossed Destinies and Vargas Llosa’s In Praise of the Stepmother,” Poetics Today 33, no. 1: 27 – 57.
Kennedy, David
2012 The Ekphrastic Encounter in Contemporary British Poetry and Elsewhere (Farnham: Ashgate
Publishing).
Klarer, Mario
2005 “Ekphrasis.” In Routledge Encyclopedia of Narrative Theory, edited by David Herman,
Manfred Jahn, and Marie-Laure Ryan, 133 – 34 (London: Routledge).
Kneale, J. Douglas
2010 “The Translation of Feelings: Ekphrasis in the Work of W. G. Sebald.” In Rewriting
Texts — Remaking Images: Interdisciplinary Perspectives, edited by Leslie Boldt, Corrado Feder-
ici, and Ernesto Virgulti, 187 – 97 (New York: Peter Lang).
Koelb, Janice Hewlett
2006 The Poetics of Description: Imagined Places in European Literature (New York: Palgrave Mac-
millan).
Krieger, Murray
1992 [1967] “Ekphrasis or the Still Movement of Poetry; or Laokoo¨n Revisited.” In Ekphrasis.
The Illusion of the Natural Sign, 263 – 88 (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press).
242
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/225/528829/0390225.pdf by guest on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 19 ──
Lindhe´, Cecilia
2015 “A Visual Sense Is Born in the Fingertips: Towards a Digital Ekphrasis,” Digital Human-
ities Quarterly 7, digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/7/1/000161/000161.html.
Loizeaux, Elizabeth Bergmann
2008 Twentieth-Century Poetry and the Arts (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Louvel, Liliane
2010 Le tiers pictural: Pour une critique intermediale (Rennes: Presses Universitaires de Rennes).
Mitchell, W. J. T.
1986 Iconology: Image, Text, Ideology (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
1994 Picture Theory (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Rippl, Gabriele
2015 “Postcolonial Ekphrasis in the Contemporary Anglophone Indian Novel.” In Handbook
of Intermediality, edited by Gabriele Rippl, 128 – 55 (Berlin: De Gruyter).
Ryan, Marie-Laure
2001 Narrative as Virtual Reality: Immersion and Interactivity in Literature and Electronic Media (Bal-
timore: Johns Hopkins University Press).
Spinozzi, Paola
2006 “Ekphrasis as Portrait: A. S. Byatt’s Fictional and Visual Doppelga¨nger.” In Writing
Seeing: Essays on Word and Image, edited by Rui Carvalho Homem and Maria de Fatima
Lambert, 223 – 34 (Amsterdam: Rodopi).
Steiner, Wendy
1988 Pictures of Romance: Form against Context in Painting and Literature (Chicago: Chicago Uni-
versity Press).
Troscianko, Emily T.
2013 “Reading Imaginatively: The Imagination in Cognitive Science and Cognitive Literary
Studies,” Journal of Literary Semantics 42: 181 – 98.
van Eck, Caroline
2015 Art, Agency, and Living Presence: From Animated Image to Excessive Object (Leiden: Leiden
University Press).
Webb, Ruth
2009 Ekphrasis, Imagination, and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Practice (Farnham: Ashgate).
Yacobi, Tamar
2013 “Ekphrastic Double Exposure and the Museum Book of Poetry,” Poetics Today 34, no. 1:
1 – 52.
Brosch
† Ekphrasis in the Digital Age
243
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/225/528829/0390225.pdf by guest on 26 December 2025
