# A new look at an old topic: ekphrasis revisited
# Source: Clüver - 2017 - A new look at an old topic ekphrasis revisited.pdf
# BibTeX key: cluver_new_2017
# Zotero dir: 3108
# Extracted chars: 49724
# Format: PDF
============================================================

── PAGE 1 ──
30
Claus Clüver*
Abstract: Focusing on ekphrastic poetry, I argue that James A. W. Heffernan’s 
succint definition of ekphrasis as the “verbal representation of a visual represen-
tation”, much cited by others and still upheld in his essay “Ekphrasis: Theory” 
in the 2015 Handbook of Intermediality (org. G. Rippl), has become even less te-
nable than when I criticized it in 1995. I then showed that it excluded ekphrastic 
descriptions of non-representational painting and sculpture as well as all archi-
tecture. I am now supported by David Kennedy’s recent studies, who has shown 
that contemporary critical ekphrasis and the surrounding discourse have turned 
against the model of a paragone based on representation. I also demonstrate that 
the dominant view of seeing ekphrasis as a prime example of intermedial trans-
position is questionable and should be replaced by the recognition that it prima-
rily verbalizes a viewer’s encounter with (a) non-kinetic visual configuration(s).
Keywords: Ekphrasis. Intermedial transposition. Non-representational art.
■T
he Handbook of Intermediality: Literature – Image – Sound – Music, 
edited by Gabriele Rippl and published in 2015, is the first volume in De 
Gruyter’s series of “Handbooks of English and American Studies” and 
is programmatically restricted to investigating the relations of literary texts 
written in English to other media but draws in its bibliographic resources on 
theoretical texts written in English and in German. Rippl’s (2015, p. 1-23) 
“Introduction” is competent, up-to-date, and helpful. The 31 essays by 
recognized specialists in the field have been divided into three large categories: 
1. text and image; 2. music, sound and performance; and 3. intermedial 
methodology and intersectionalities (three essays). Rippl’s “Introduction” 
provides the general theoretical orientation for the enterprise.
* 
Indiana University – Bloomington – Indiana – United States. E-mail: cluver@indiana.edu
A new look At An old 
topic: ekphrAsis revisited


── PAGE 2 ──
31
DOSSIÊ
A NEW LOOK AT AN OLD TOPIC: EKPHRASIS REVISITED
TODAS AS LETRAS, São Paulo, v. 19, n. 1, p. 30-44, jan./abr. 2017
http://dx.doi.org/10.5935/1980-6914/letras.v19n1p30-44
Interestingly, the first category begins with seven essays grouped under the 
heading “Ekphrasis”. They have a basically chronological bent, ranging from 
“Medieval Ekphrasis” to the “Early Modern Period” and then considering various 
aspects of ekphrasis in modernity: “Ekphrasis and Poetry”, “Ekphrasis and the 
Novel/Narrative Fiction”, “Ekphrasis in the Age of Digital Reproduction”, and 
“Postcolonial Ekphrasis in the Contemporary Anglophone Indian Novel”. This 
covers a wider perspective than most monographs or essay collections on the 
subject. The section is headed by the essay “Ekphrasis: Theory”, in which James 
A.W. Heffernan presents (again) his understanding of this concept as he had 
elaborated it over twenty years earlier in his Museum of Words, although in 
modified form. Interestingly, among the other contributors to this section only 
David Kennedy, writing about “Ekphrasis and Poetry”, engages – rather critically 
– with Heffernan’s view, while the other five, focusing mostly on ekphrasis in 
narratives, have little use for Heffernan’s theoretical considerations. This includes 
Rippl herself, although in her essay on postcolonial ekphrasis she does refer to 
Heffernan’s “widely accepted definition which claims that ekphrasis is the verbal 
representation of visual representation” (RIPPL, 2015, p. 129). But she makes no 
further reference to his theory and points to her own earlier “critique of Heffernan’s 
use of the term ‘representation’” (RIPPL, 2015, p. 129; cf. RIPPL, 2005, p. 97-98).
It was exactly Heffernan’s positioning of “visual representation” as the object 
of “verbal representation” in the catchy definition cited by Rippl that twenty 
years ago triggered my own questioning in response to his Museum of Words: The 
Poetics of Ekphrasis from Homer to Ashbury (1953), which was to establish him 
as a leading authority in the field. Having worked on ekphrastic representations 
of the mature work of a Piet Mondrian and a Josef Albers (cf. CLÜVER, 1978, 
1989), I saw that Heffernan’s overall definition worked well for the kinds of texts 
he had discussed, but not for texts dealing with the work of these artists. The 
term “visual representation”, as understood by Heffernan, referred to the 
representation of objects in the phenomenal world. Until the beginning of the 
twentieth century, that was all that painting and sculpture and most graphic art 
had been about. The visual artworks referred to by Heffernan ranged from the 
(fictional) shield of Achilles in Homer to van Gogh’s Starry Night (HEFFERNAN, 
1993, p. 183) and Magritte’s surrealist La condition humaine (p. 56). But the new 
century had introduced a kind of artmaking that was not only increasingly 
abstract but even entirely “non-representational” or “non-figurative” or “non-
objective” – terms used for what in German is perhaps more simply and 
unequivocally called “gegenstandslos”, as opposed to “gegenständlich”1. Such 
“non-representational” artworks relied entirely on their medium’s materials (line, 
shape, color, texture, in the case of painting) and the physical media that had 
produced them and had left their traces (board, canvas; tempera, oil; brushes, 
fingers etc.) as well as on the techniques by which they had been applied and on 
the structures thus created and the visual programs thus executed (as in abstract 
expressionism, concrete art, or op art). Viewers soon realized that, besides 
appealing to our sensibilities, such “non-representational” artworks were 
meaningful in their own right even though it might be difficult to express such 
1 
“Gegenstandslos” is closest to “non-objective”, but “gegenständliche Kunst” does not have an English equivalent of “objective 
art”. A translation of Heffernan’s phrase would require a noun based on the verb “darstellen”, which has a range of significa-
tions only slightly narrower than “represent”. 


── PAGE 3 ──
CLAUS CLÜVER
32
DOSSIÊ
TODAS AS LETRAS, São Paulo, v. 19, n. 1, p. 30-44, jan./abr. 2017
http://dx.doi.org/10.5935/1980-6914/letras.v19n1p30-44
meanings in words, because they involved aspects of visual materials and 
structures that rely on a non-verbal semiotics. But many could be read as 
configurations representing space-time relations or ambiguities of visual 
perception, or as signs, symbols, or visual metaphors representing abstract 
concepts or conditions such as movement, tension, order, harmony, conflict, 
chaos, narrativity, and much more, besides pointing self-referentially at 
themselves and the particular style, and thus also at the culture and period, they 
represent. Our response to the various techniques and styles of representing the 
material world is undoubtedly shaped by the same aspects, although ekphrastic 
texts may often not verbalize these. In abstract paintings and sculptures the 
signs referring to the extra-pictorial world are distorted and reduced, and in non-
representational visual artworks they have been eliminated, even though as 
viewers we may tend to associate certain features with extra-pictorial objects, 
depending on our viewing habits. While literary representations of abstract and 
non-representational visual art may be relatively rare, they certainly exist, and 
so do verbal representations in art criticism or art history books. 
To accommodate such texts under the ekphrastic label I therefore modified 
Heffernan’s pithy definition in 1995, in a lecture entitled “Ekphrasis Revisited: 
On Verbal Representations of Non-verbal Texts”2. My proposal read: “Ekphrasis 
is the verbal representation of a real or fictitious text composed in a non-verbal 
sign system” (cf. CLÜVER, 1997, p. 26). Heffernan (1993, p. 4) had insisted that 
ekphrasis “explicitly represents representation itself. What ekphrasis represents 
in words, therefore, must itself be representational”, which had led him to 
conclude: “Because it verbally represents visual art, ekphrasis stages a contest 
between rival modes of representation” (p. 6). In this view, the contest is 
ultimately between the ways a visual artwork and a literary text can represent 
an object that exists in the extra-artistic phenomenal world. Architecture and 
much twentieth-century sculpture and painting, whatever they may represent, 
do not function as representations of the phenomenal world, and verbal texts 
that represent them therefore cannot be included in the ekphrastic “mode” as 
constructed by Heffernan in the 1990s. He had denied Hart Crane’s poem “The 
Bridge” ekphrastic status because “[t]he Brooklyn Bridge may be considered a 
work of art and construed as a symbol of many things, but since it was not 
created to represent anything” (HEFFERNAN, 1993, p. 4) the poem representing 
the bridge could not qualify as an ekphrastic text. He relativized the bridge’s 
status as a work of art and as a symbol (and thus not a “representation”) and, 
along with Crane’s “The Bridge”, removed all verbal representations of non-
representational visual art to a place outside of the ekphrastic mode.
My new definition avoided the ambiguous term “visual representation” and 
also opened the concept beyond Heffernan’s restriction to “a literary 
representation of visual art” (HEFFERNAN, 1993, p. 1). It promoted the view of 
ekphrasis as representing a medial configuration as such, as primarily a 
representation of the image, not of what the image refers to in the extra-artistic 
world. The verbal texts would not have to be literary, and the objects represented 
could be “non-representational” paintings or sculptures and even architectural 
structures; they would have to be medial compositions but not necessarily “art”. 
2 
Opening presentation of the International Conference on “Interarts Studies: New Perspectives” at Lunds Universitet, Sweden, 
May 1995 (see CLÜVER, 1997). 


── PAGE 4 ──
33
DOSSIÊ
A NEW LOOK AT AN OLD TOPIC: EKPHRASIS REVISITED
TODAS AS LETRAS, São Paulo, v. 19, n. 1, p. 30-44, jan./abr. 2017
http://dx.doi.org/10.5935/1980-6914/letras.v19n1p30-44
This reorientation removed the traditional focus on the visual and the verbal as 
rivaling enterprises engaged in a paragone.
But “text composed in a non-verbal sign system” was not a fortunate 
formulation. Besides using “text” misleadingly to signify a configuration in any 
sign system (following semiotic usage) I also made the definition too inclusive. 
Using the label for verbal representations of configurations in any media 
employing any sign system and its codes (music, dance, mime, performance 
arts, cinema, etc.) made it unnecessarily imprecise and impracticable. It may 
have been these shortcomings that overshadowed my critique of Heffernan’s 
restrictive view.
In a series of follow-up essays in subsequent years I further examined my 
definition and explored its limits. In “Quotation, Enargeia, and the Functions of 
Ekphrasis” (1998) I changed “verbal representation” to “verbalization” in an effort 
to create my own restrictions, a change that I have since recognized as vain and 
have undone. “The Musikgedicht: Notes on an Ekphrastic Genre” (1999) elaborated 
on the poems in Jorge de Sena’s Arte de Música (1968) which I had already 
referred to in “Ekphrasis Revisited” as backing up my expansion of the concept 
and its label; I would now eliminate its subtitle but otherwise still support my 
findings, which dealt mostly with the differences between verbally representing 
music and ekphrastic representations of visual configurations. “(Re)Writing 
Edward Hopper” (1999) covered a series of poems in English and Portuguese 
ranging from texts that could be read as close intersemiotic transpositions of 
Hopper paintings to mere intermedial references, mostly by title. 
I did not return to the subject until 2013, when I was asked to contribute an 
essay on “Ekphrasis and Adaptation” to the Oxford Handbook on Adaptation 
Studies organized by Thomas Leitch (see CLÜVER, 2017). 1 used the opportunity 
to review, rectify, and considerably expand my earlier definition. The short 
version of it I now formulated as “Ekphrasis is the verbal representation of real or 
fictive configurations composed in a non-kinetic visual medium”. I added “non 
-kinetic” to exclude verbal representations of “configurations” (the term that I 
now find most applicable where I used to say “texts”) on television or in the 
cinema, because these are products of plurimedial media and require different 
approaches, terms, and techniques for verbal representation. What Heffernan 
now includes as “cinematic ekphrasis” and exemplifies with descriptions of films 
in Manuel Puig’s Kiss of the Spider Woman (HEFFERNAN, 2015, p. 45-48) should 
not be conflated with the many uses of ekphrasis in narrative fiction.
While again focusing almost exclusively on poetry and using a sonnet by 
John Hollander, “Edward Hopper’s Seven A. M.” (1948), as an example of an 
ekphrastic text that can be read as a translation of the painting because the 
voice we hear in the poem reacting to the image can also be heard as that of the 
painter reacting to the scene he supposedly observed and then depicted,3 I 
discussed Carlos Drummond de Andrade’s short poem “Quadro I (Mondrian)” 
and a poem by Eugen Gomringer, “außenrund”, on an entirely non-figurative 
concrete work by Marcel Wyss, teilkreis-projektionen: zwölf variationen 
(projections of circle segments: twelve variations, 1977), as ekphrastic texts that 
would not be covered by Heffernan’s definition of 1993. 
3 
An idea I first developed in “On Intersemiotic Transposition” (see CLÜVER, 1989, p. 66-67).


── PAGE 5 ──
CLAUS CLÜVER
34
DOSSIÊ
TODAS AS LETRAS, São Paulo, v. 19, n. 1, p. 30-44, jan./abr. 2017
http://dx.doi.org/10.5935/1980-6914/letras.v19n1p30-44
Nor would they be accommodated by his Handbook essay of 2015, although 
Heffernan there made a gesture toward including ekphrastic descriptions of post-
modernist art that would not immediately be recognized as a visual representation. 
After reviewing the history of “ekphrasis” as a concept related to the literary 
description of visual art and engaging with differing views of the nature of verbal 
and visual representation, in particular that of Murray Krieger, Heffernan arrived 
at offering his reading of Lessing’s distinction between poetry as time-oriented and 
visual art as space-oriented and the 18th-century theorist’s admission of a potential 
temporal dimension in visual works of art. From there he went on to state:
If works of art “are structures in space–time” rather than either spatial or tem-
poral, as W. J. T. Mitchell argues (1986, [p.] 103), ekphrasis must allow for both 
elements in the works it represents. For this reason I have defined ekphrasis as 
“the verbal representation of visual representation” (HEFFERNAN 1993, [p.] 3). 
This definition makes room for descriptions of paintings and sculptures that re-
present anything at all, whether someone or something in motion or a still object 
like Magritte’s famous pipe (HEFFERNAN, 2015, p. 38).
The purpose of the first phrase is not easy to see. It may mean that an 
ekphrastic representation should address temporal dimensions implied in a 
painting or a sculpture, or that it should deal with moving objects such as 
Calder’s mobiles, or with moving images on the computer, on TV, or in the 
cinema. It is not clear why he considers this to be the reason why his 1993 
definition still works. The final statement returns to a restriction of the objects 
of ekphrastic description to paintings and sculptures, and in either case to 
visual representations of still or moving objects – supposedly connected with the 
phenomenal world. But the phrase “that represent anything at all” is meant to 
lead up to the quotation of the art critic Leo Steinberg’s ekphrastic interpretation 
of Shade (1959), “one of the works with which Jasper Johns launched 
Postmodernism in the late 1950s” (HEFFERNAN, 2015, p. 41). This quote 
appeared in Heffernan’s instructive essay “Speaking for Pictures: The Rhetoric 
of Art Criticism” (1999) and has been included in several of his later pieces. The 
essay itself was reprinted in Heffernan’s Cultivating Picturacy (2006). The quote 
also appears in his essay “Speaking for Pictures: Language and Abstract Art”, 
which in truncated form was also reprinted in Picturacy, but without the 
Steinberg text, which appears earlier in the volume4. 
In all these instances Steinberg’s interpretation of Johns’s Shade follows a 
discussion of the “Modernist” art that preceded it, “an art that seem[ed] to turn 
its back on representation, on reference to any object or figure that we might 
recognize from our experience of the world outside the painting” (HEFFERNAN, 
2015, p. 40). Even though puzzling, Johns’s work “returns us to the world of 
tangible objects that Modernism had renounced – to objects such as flags, target, 
and shade” (HEFFERNAN, 2015, p. 41). In 2015, Heffernan only provided a brief 
summary of how he read the “abstract” works of Modernism. He had developed 
his ideas first in the section on “Leo Steinberg and the Taciturnity of Abstract 
Art” of his 1999 essay, the last of his five detailed and critical exemplifications of 
the “rhetoric of art criticism” ranging from Philostratus5 to Steinberg. What 
4 
In Picturacy it has the title “Reza, Pollock, Richter: Language and Abstract Art.” I shall quote from the 2006 essay.
5 
The long passage about Philostratus in the 2015 essay (p. 38-40) is largely a repetition of this early text.


── PAGE 6 ──
35
DOSSIÊ
A NEW LOOK AT AN OLD TOPIC: EKPHRASIS REVISITED
TODAS AS LETRAS, São Paulo, v. 19, n. 1, p. 30-44, jan./abr. 2017
http://dx.doi.org/10.5935/1980-6914/letras.v19n1p30-44
Heffernan had to say about Modernism and abstract art was to a large extent 
inspired by W. J. T. Mitchell’s “Ut Pictura Theoria: Abstract Painting and 
Language” (1994); it echoed several of the critical voices cited by Mitchell but did 
not engage with his central thesis. Instead, Heffernan (1999, p. 27) asked:
What sort of story, after all, can be told about an art that apparently turns its 
back on representation, on reference to any object or figure that we might recog-
nize from our experience of the world outside the painting, and that might give 
us something to talk about?.
This very phrase returned in his 2015 essay (p. 40), in the paragraph that led 
up to his quotation of the Steinberg passage on Johns. The phrase had already 
made a come-back in 2006 in “Speaking for Pictures: Language and Abstract 
Art”6 (p. 26), which by its very title announced that it resumed a topic broached 
at the end of the 1999 essay. Here Heffernan made an effort to come to terms 
with “abstract” art, from Malevich and the later Kandinsky to Jackson Pollock, 
Robert Rauschenberg, and Ad Reinhardt as well as the post-modernist art of a 
Jasper Johns and a Gerhard Richter. He did not consider literary representations 
of such art but relied quite heavily, as in 1999, on the authority of such influential 
American art critics as Clement Greenberg, Rosalind Krauss, Michael Fried – by 
whom he quoted a lengthy description of Pollock’s Number 1 (1948), with which 
he disagreed – and Leo Steinberg. And (as had Mitchell) he emphasized the 
voices of critics that emphasized “modern art’s will to silence” (KRAUSS, 1986, 
p. 9), which supposedly also eliminated the possibility of interpretation (SONTAG, 
p. 201-202).
Answering his persistent question, in 2006 Heffernan found much to talk 
about by developing the thesis that “abstract” art can be read as figurative and 
thus ultimately referential. He spent considerable space showing that, as 
opposed to Michael Fried’s assertion that nothing in Pollock’s Number 1 (1948) 
“deserves to be read as a figure” (FRIED apud HEFFERNAN, 2006, p. 33), others, 
himself included, have indeed seen figures in Pollock’s work, and that it is easy 
from there to associate these with objects in extra-pictorial reality (HEFFERNAN, 
2006, p. 34). Which led him to insist that, “[w]ether geometric, biomorphic, or 
anthropomorphic, [figures] inform his paintings, which may be seen or read as 
veils drawn over shapes we can recognize – and specify” (p. 36). Ultimately, he 
saw even in paintings that most puzzled him, monochromatic canvases and 
their perceived “silence”, a possibility to make them speak. One of the conclusions 
he favored in looking at Rauschenberg’s white paintings was that “the surface of 
an abstract painting may actually be read as a veil or screen for what stands 
behind it” (p. 29). If lifting the veil reveals to the imagination anything figurative, 
even if it does not resemble anything in the “real world”, we can consider the 
work to be a representation that is meaningful and can be interpreted:
If visual representation does not require resemblance, as Nelson Goodman in-
sists, no essential barrier separates the kinds of signification that abstract and 
realistic painting can achieve; nothing thwarts their capacity to stand for some-
thing we can experience in the real world, or for something we may conceive or 
imagine (HFFERNAN, 2006, p. 38).
6 
It appeared as the opening essay of an important collection of essays (see HEFFERNAN, 2006, in Homem and Lambert)..


── PAGE 7 ──
CLAUS CLÜVER
36
DOSSIÊ
TODAS AS LETRAS, São Paulo, v. 19, n. 1, p. 30-44, jan./abr. 2017
http://dx.doi.org/10.5935/1980-6914/letras.v19n1p30-44
For Heffernan, that “something” is still something tangible, something 
figurative, even if it does not resemble that which it is taken to represent. As I 
read his interesting essay I see him approaching “abstract” art still with the eyes 
and expectations of someone used to seeing in visual images references to the 
extra-artistic world of phenomenal reality, even though these words imply an 
extension of the concept of “representation” that will allow him to maintain his 
much quoted phrase. But while insisting on the continued validity of that 
phrase, in his “Theory” essay of 2015 Heffernan makes no reference to his idea 
that “abstract” art might permit us to discover figures in such works and to 
move from there to construct some kind of representation. He repeated the 
rhetorical question, but the paragraph it introduces ends in a generality: “So far 
from silencing the critic, then, abstract art provokes and demands at least as 
much commentary as any of its precursors” (HEFFERNAN, 2015, p. 41) – and 
moves from there directly to quoting again the Steinberg passage about Johns’s 
Shade, which is presented as “clearly show[ing] how much we can learn about 
the art of ekphrasis by studying it in what might be called its purest form – as 
art criticism” (HEFFERNAN, 2015, p. 42). The essay’s subsequent section on 
“Ekphrastic Poetry” deals only with a few canonical texts as discussed in his 
book of 1993. He nowhere indicates what kind of “stories” literary texts about 
abstract art might produce.
What is missing from the 2006 essay is any confrontation of the “abstract” 
art discussed by Heffernan with the “concrete” art of the Swiss painters around 
Max Bill or of Bill’s Brazilian disciples, the concrete or constructivist artists of 
São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro who began developing their art and its theoretical 
support in the early 1950s. This was an art based on the statement and 
development of “ideias visíveis”, “visible ideas” executed by the manipulation of 
the artist’s materials without prompting the viewer to link this concrete 
configuration with any object or figure in the world of experience7 – even though 
viewers like Heffernan might find ways of doing just that. Concrete artists 
avoided guiding their viewers even by suggestive titles – another of the avenues 
Heffernan used to make pictures speak. 
Bill had come out of the Bauhaus tradition. One of the outstanding Bauhaus 
artists was Josef Albers, whose work was a major inspiration for Gomringer’s 
concrete poetry. Paintings by Malevich, Mondrian, Albers, and others that do 
not suggest any representation of “figures” relating to an extra-pictorial 
phenomenal reality have inspired ekphrastic poems which do not suggest they 
do. Several of these have taken the form of what Heffernan referred to in 1993 
as “iconic poetry” (p. 4) by incorporating visual references to the work represented. 
Gomringer’s collaboration with more than thirty non-representational artists 
over several decades has resulted in a number of ekphrastic poems of the kind 
I have illustrated by “außenrund”, poems that cannot be covered by the phrase 
“verbal representation of visual representation”. 
But in the essay for the Oxford Handbook of Adaptation Studies where I 
analyzed “außenrund” I still framed my deliberations about both ekphrasis and 
adaptation within the context of “intermedial transpositions”, as which I had 
7 
For the connections between Brazilian concrete artists and poets in São Paulo see Clüver, “The Noigandres Poets and Concrete 
Art”, 2008. These concrete paintings and sculptures, to which Mitchell does not refer, would serve well to exemplify his thesis 
concerning the interdependence of “abstract” art and theory developed in his “Ut Pictura Theoria”.


── PAGE 8 ──
37
DOSSIÊ
A NEW LOOK AT AN OLD TOPIC: EKPHRASIS REVISITED
TODAS AS LETRAS, São Paulo, v. 19, n. 1, p. 30-44, jan./abr. 2017
http://dx.doi.org/10.5935/1980-6914/letras.v19n1p30-44
approached ekphrasis since my earliest efforts, the essay investigating the 
transposition of “Painting Into Poetry” of 1978 and the essay “On Intersemiotic 
Transposition” of 1989. This is where theories of intermediality have usually 
placed these phenomena (see, e.g., RAJEWSKY, 2005).
As I resumed my work on the subject I increasingly began to question this 
view of ekphrastic poetry as a particular form of intermedial transposition within 
the field of word-and-image studies. I realized that neither Heffernan’s view, 
following a lengthy tradition, of ekphrasis as basically engaged in a rivalry 
between two modes of representation, and the equally lengthy tradition of 
looking at ekphrasis as a transfer between two media, paid sufficient attention 
to what John Hollander would call, quoting P. B. Shelley, “the gazer’s spirit” 
(HOLLANDER, 1995). David Kennedy’s The Ekphrastic Encounter in Contemporary 
British Poetry and Elsewhere (2012) suggested in its title that ekphrastic texts, 
here again in poetry, may suggest a different critical approach and emphasis, 
one that is also indicated in the title of a new collection of essays still in press 
which he and Richard Meek have organized, Ekphrastic Encounters: New 
Interdisciplinary Essays on Literature and the Visual Arts. My own contribution 
to that volume, “On Gazer’s Encounters with Visual Art: Ekphrasis, Readers, 
Iconotexts”, approaches Drummond’s poem (again) as well as a poem by Pedro 
Tamen about a “representational” painting by Manuel Amado and a poem by 
Gomringer accompanying seven “non-representational” aquatint prints by 
Heinz-Günter Prager, sieben begehren (seven desires, 2010), as records of an 
encounter. It furthermore broaches the question of how such records position 
the reader of the text, which becomes more complex in narrative fiction where a 
(frequently fictive) visual artwork may be described by an extradiegetic narrator 
or as perceived by an intradiegetic character in a specified situation, and where 
readers have to consider the particular functions such ekphrastic moments 
have in the overall narrative as they understand it.
Interpreting Drummond’s three-line poem “QUADRO I (Mondrian)”, the only 
one about an abstract work among thirty-two short ekphrastic poems collected 
as “Arte em exposição” (Art on Exhibit)8, I concluded that its generic title and its 
sparse and succinct form convey a reading of Mondrian’s mature paintings as 
highly abstract representations of the artist’s view of the universe without 
permitting us to identify a specific work, and that this reading is as much 
expressed by the poem’s form as by its words. But this form is not exceptional: 
Ten of these short records of encounters with canonical paintings have only 
three lines, eight have only two, and the longest among these thirty-two poems 
has just six. Usually Drummond zoomed in on a specific detail or quality of a 
work or its effect, as when he highlighted the color in “Odalisca vermelha 
(Matisse)” by rolling l’s and r’s (“A indolência da odalisca em rosa rubra / respira 
paz de lânguido fervor”), ending with a short fourth line: “pura cor” (p. 31), or 
when he encapsulated the reaction to “nature screaming” in “O Grito (Munch)” 
in the line: “Doem os ouvidos, doi o quadro” (p. 30). These are not transpositions 
of the images but expressions of a viewer’s personal reaction that nevertheless 
impress the poem’s reader as penetrating to a work’s core. The latter can be said 
8 
According to the verso of the title page of Drummond’s Farewell, “os poemas de ARTE EM EXPOSIÇÃO foram publicados em 
1990 pela Ed. Salamandra/Record” (Farewell, p. 4). In Farewell, the 32 poems about individual paintings grouped under the title 
“Arte em exposição” appear on p. 29-37, “QUADRO I (Mondrian)” on p. 35.


── PAGE 9 ──
CLAUS CLÜVER
38
DOSSIÊ
TODAS AS LETRAS, São Paulo, v. 19, n. 1, p. 30-44, jan./abr. 2017
http://dx.doi.org/10.5935/1980-6914/letras.v19n1p30-44
of the Mondrian poem as well, except that it may refer to almost any of the 
painter’s later works and that it reflects at least as much of the poet’s knowledge 
of Mondrian’s world view as it does of his reaction to the work. Given the formal 
affinity, the poem can be seen as a verbal equivalent, and therefore as a 
transposition, of Mondrian’s manner of representation, contrary to the other 
short poems and their relation to the particular painting evoked. 
Figure 1: Heinz-Günter Prager (b. 1944), sieben begehren. 2010, aquatint on 
hand-made paper, portfolio with 8 sheets, 77 x 55.5 cm each. Edition of 7. Re-
hau: institut für konstruktive kunst und konkrete poesie. Images 5 and 6. Rpt. 
in GILBERT (Org.), nichts für schnell-betrachter, p. 210. Photos: László Tóth. © 
2016 Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York /VG Bild-Kunst, Bonn.
As I interpret it, Tamen’s much longer poem, which is printed side by side 
with a copy of Amado’s painting, does not transpose anything from the image 
but instead enacts a reading of it as an abstraction of the scene represented, 
which makes the painting in the end appear as a “Mondrian recheado” (Mondrian 
filled in; TAMEN, p. 60). Tamen entitled this volume of his ekphrastic poems 
Depois de Ver (After Looking). That title might also cover the following poem by 
Eugen Gomringer:
the game of circles
(by twos, by threes, by fours)
the seven ways
to meet one another
the seven ways 
to touch one another
the seven ways 
to desire one another
the seven ways 
to circle apart


── PAGE 10 ──
39
DOSSIÊ
A NEW LOOK AT AN OLD TOPIC: EKPHRASIS REVISITED
TODAS AS LETRAS, São Paulo, v. 19, n. 1, p. 30-44, jan./abr. 2017
http://dx.doi.org/10.5935/1980-6914/letras.v19n1p30-44
the seven ways
to let go of each other 
the seven ways
to make it like prager
the seven ways
to see it like gomringer (trans. Claus Clüver)9
Gomringer’s text presents itself self-referentially as a particular way of seeing 
what another produces, setting the act of interpretation against the act of 
creation with its own intentions and motivations. The text is included in the 
portfolio with Prager’s prints as the first leaf of a total of eight and, like Tamen’s, 
depends entirely on this juxtaposition. But also like Tamen’s, it cannot be read 
as a transposition of the visual objects. The seven prints are non-representational, 
each showing from two to four loosely sketched oval shapes that can be read as 
tilted circles, and one or two sharply defined rectangles, all in white against a 
black background (see Figure 1). Since in the text there are only five verbs 
referring to these seven untitled images there seems to be no correspondence 
between verbs and images; moreover, “the seven ways” makes every verb apply 
to each of the seven prints with their elliptical forms that the text refers to as 
“circles”. Nevertheless, the order of the verbs suggests a sequence from encounter 
to separation, with “to desire one another” representing a climax; but the fixed 
sequence of the non-figurative images does not follow such narrative logic. 
“seeing it like gomringer” provided the title “seven desires” on the cover of the 
folder, which, along with the poem, may direct the viewer’s response. But the 
final line with the impersonal, objectifying “gomringer” also distances us from 
this view and invites us to find our own way of looking at Prager’s work. We may 
even disagree with the idea of inferring slightly anthropomorphic actions into 
the forms created by the artist – which raises the question of how to interpret 
non-representational images and how to verbalize such interpretations.
David Kennedy’s “Ekphrasis and Poetry” in Rippl’s Handbook begins by 
presenting itself as a continuation and expansion of the theory of ekphrastic 
poetry as offered by Heffernan in the same volume. Kennedy even takes up the 
canonical examples used by Heffernan to demonstrate differences between 
poetry and art criticism. But he presents them as approached in the context of 
what he calls “critical ekphrasis”, an approach taken by modern poets as well as 
by critics that “conceiv[es] of the ekphrastic art object as foreign or other” 
(KENNEDY, 2015, p. 84). His most interesting example is a project I know only 
from Kennedy’s description, Maggie O’Sullivan’s Tonetreks, a sequence of eleven 
ekphrastic poems composed in 1975-77 but not published until 2006 as part of 
a larger book, Body of Work. Among the works represented are paintings by 
Malevich and Rothko, and several of the texts apparently visually imitate aspects 
of the works to which they refer. Kennedy describes and interprets many details 
of O’Sullivan’s varied procedures. There is one passage he quotes, which he 
views as
9 
Printed with permission of the poet.


── PAGE 11 ──
CLAUS CLÜVER
40
DOSSIÊ
TODAS AS LETRAS, São Paulo, v. 19, n. 1, p. 30-44, jan./abr. 2017
http://dx.doi.org/10.5935/1980-6914/letras.v19n1p30-44
not only crucial to the ekphrastic sequence as a whole but also, crucially, to 
understanding how ekphrasis works. Verse three appears to quote the painter 
[Arshile Gorky] directly:
 You said, 
Permit me my making, there is no meaning here.
Meaning is the spectator’s privilege.
The fetish
to invent a camouflage (O’SULLIVAN, 2006, p. 23).
The passage is so clear that it requires little in the way of critical gloss. What we 
can say is that it speaks to how ekphrasis is founded on the need to interpret. 
The search for meaning is presented here as something that gets in the way of 
the actual activities of making art which may in fact have little to do with making 
meaning. It also suggests that the artist may have little conception of what the 
meaning of a specific work might be (KENNEDY, 2015, p. 88).
Interestingly, while Kennedy’s selection and interpretation of the lines from 
the poem about Gorky emphasizes the self-assumed task of contemporary 
critical ekphrasis to provide interpretation, his summary of O’Sullivan’s sequence 
highlights her apparent refusal to interpret and her tendency to explore the 
materials of the works represented and to find verbal (and visual) equivalents in 
her poetry. To this he adds the observation that her poems reveal “the importance 
of the body in conveying the ekphrastic meaning of an individual poem” 
(KENNEDY, 2015, p. 89). This leads him to conclude, after considering the work 
of other poets as well, that “a new focus on the body in ekphrastic poetry is one 
way of introducing a new ‘turn’ in critical responses to ekphrasis”; but another, 
equally important, is “the idea of the encounter” (KENNEDY, 2015, p. 90). He 
sees this primarily in the encounter, like the one staged by O’Sullivan, between 
text and image and between visual and textual cultures. 
Kennedy’s essay exemplifies what he meant by claiming in his book The 
Ekphrastic Encounter (2012) that “a revision of some aspects of the dominant 
representational model of ekphrasis is long overdue” (p. 1). His book focuses on 
contemporary British ekphrastic poems, but does not include any discussion of 
O’Sullivan’s work. There is no explicit discussion of what exactly “encounter” 
signifies here. It definitely implies an encounter of viewers with a work of art and 
their verbalization of their responses, compelled by “the need to ‘complete’ the 
image’s perfection”. Before he outlines his ideas about “Ekphrasis Beyond 
Representation” in the introduction to his book Kennedy suggests that modern 
viewers experience “works of art [as] stand[ing] literally apart from us and our 
daily lives […], untouchable in [their] apparently perfected form”, while we are 
“intimately involved” with the language we use in our response, which
[at] some level […] reminds us of the contingent nature of ourselves and our li-
ves. […]
So ekphrasis is not, as James A. W. Heffernan has argued, so much a matter of 
a paragonal struggle between word and image […] as an attempt to bring art 
into the realm of our contingencies (KENNEDY, 2012, p. 6).


── PAGE 12 ──
41
DOSSIÊ
A NEW LOOK AT AN OLD TOPIC: EKPHRASIS REVISITED
TODAS AS LETRAS, São Paulo, v. 19, n. 1, p. 30-44, jan./abr. 2017
http://dx.doi.org/10.5935/1980-6914/letras.v19n1p30-44
Kennedy’s later observation that “contemporary British ekphrastic poetry 
offers significant challenges to established criticism founded on the idea of 
representation” (p. 11) implies that these developments question the concept 
both of verbal and of visual representation. This means, among other things, 
that Steinberg’s passage about Johns’s Shade, Heffernan’s favorite quotation, 
loses any implied claim to an exemplary status except as an impressive example 
of the art criticism of its time. It also prompts me to reconsider my latest mini-
definition of ekphrasis, which still contains the phrase “verbal representation” 
(see p. XX above). 
But as I have already indicated, my deliberations developed in my most recent 
essay, “On Gazers’ Encounters with Visual Art”, further prompted by reflections 
on Kennedy’s work, have led me to conclude that our understanding of ekphrasis 
is no longer well served by being approached within either of the traditional 
modes: not as a struggle between two kinds of representation, and not as a 
prime example of intermedial transposition within the discourse on basic types 
of intermediality. Our understanding is also not helped by one-line definitions. 
Here I reproduce, in slightly altered form, the definition with which I concluded 
my essay:
Ekphrasis verbalizes a real or fictive viewer’s perceptions of, or reactions to, 
characteristic features of non-kinetic visual configurations. It deals with configu-
rations that actually exist, or suggests the perceived existence of such configu-
rations in virtual, or fictive, reality. Its materials are purely verbal, but may in-
volve the exploitation of visual aspects of the verbal medium. It produces a 
mental image of configurations in a non-kinetic visual medium, making them 
anschaulich without literally showing anything. It implies a viewer’s gaze at 
these objects; if they are the product of an encounter with the phenomenal 
world, it suggests the producer’s way of representing that world according to 
the semiotic and cultural conventions of the age. Ekphrasis is a parallel proce-
dure to verbal representations of configurations in other than non-kinetic visual 
media, including such a kinetic visual medium as film. Many but by no means 
all instances of ekphrasis can be read as intermedial transpositions. As literary 
texts, ekphrases can be free-standing or integrated as ekphrastic passages in 
other texts, including plays, libretti, and filmscripts. There are many kinds of 
markers that compel the attentive reader to receive certain verbal texts as 
ekphrastic — depending on the concept of ekphrasis accepted in the respective 
interpretive community. The present definition may persuade those who read it 
now, but as a cultural construct it is bound to change.
UM NOVO OLHAR SOBRE UM VELHO TEMA: ÉCFRASE REVISITADA
Resumo: Focalizando na poesia ecfrástica, argumento que a definição sucinta de 
écfrase de James A.W. Heffernan – “representação verbal de uma representação 
visual” – amplamente citada por outros e ainda defendida em seu ensaio 
“Ekphrasis: theory” no livro Handbook of Intermediality, 2015, de G. Rippl, 
torna-se ainda menos defensável agora do que quando a critiquei em 1995. 
Naquela época, mostrei que a definição excluía descrições ecfrásticas de pintu-
ras e esculturas não representacionais como também da arquitetura. Agora 


── PAGE 13 ──
CLAUS CLÜVER
42
DOSSIÊ
TODAS AS LETRAS, São Paulo, v. 19, n. 1, p. 30-44, jan./abr. 2017
http://dx.doi.org/10.5935/1980-6914/letras.v19n1p30-44
tenho o apoio dos recentes estudos de David Kennedy, que demonstram que a 
écfrase crítica contemporânea e o discurso circundante se voltaram contra o 
modelo de um paragone baseado na representação. Além disso, argumento que 
a visão dominante que considera a écfrase um exemplo primário de transposi-
ção intermidiática é questionável e deveria ser substituída pelo reconhecimento 
de que ela verbaliza, primeiramente, o encontro de um espectador com configu-
rações visuais não cinéticas.
Palavras-chave: Écfrase. Transformação intermidiática. Arte não figurativa.
REFERÊNCIAS
ANDRADE, C. D. de. Quadro I (Mondrian). In: ANDRADE, C. D. de. Farewell. Rio 
de Janeiro: Record, 1996. p. 35.
CLÜVER, C. Painting into Poetry. Yearbook of Comparative and General Litera-
ture, v. 27, p. 19-34, 1978. 
CLÜVER, C. On Intersemiotic Transposition. Poetics Today, v. 10, n. 1, p. 55-90, 
1989.
CLÜVER, C. Ekphrasis Reconsidered: On Verbal Representations of Non-Verbal 
Texts. In: LAGERROTH, U.-B.; LUND, H.; HEDLING, E. (Org.). Interart Poetics: 
Essays on the Interrelations Between the Arts and Media. Amsterdam; Atlanta: 
Rodopi, 1997. p. 19-33.
CLÜVER, C. Quotation, Enargeia, and the Functions of Ekphrasis. In: RO-
BILLARD, V.; JONGENEEL, E. (Org.). Pictures Into Words: Theoretical and Descrip-
tive Approaches to Ekphrasis. Amsterdam: VU University Press, 1998. p. 35-52.
CLÜVER, C. (Re)Writing Edward Hopper. In: SCHMELING, M.; SCHMITZ-
-EMANS, M. (Org.). Das visuelle Gedächtnis der Literatur. Würzburg: Königshau-
sen & Neumann, 1999. p. 141-165.
CLÜVER, C. The Musikgedicht: Notes on an Ekphrastic Genre. In: BERNHART, 
W.; SCHER, S. P.; WOLF, W. (Org.). Word and Music Studies: Defining the Field. 
Word and Music Studies, Amsterdam; Atlanta: Rodopi, 1999. v. 1, p. 187-204. 
CLÜVER, C. The Noigandres Poets and Concrete Art. [online]. Special section on 
“poesia concreta.” CiberLetras: Revista de crítica literaria y de cultura – Journal 
of literary criticism and culture, n. 17, 2007.
CLÜVER, C. The Noigandres Poets and Concrete Art. Pós, Belo Horizonte, v. 1, 
n. 1, p. 114-135, 2008. 
CLÜVER, C. Ekphrasis and Adaptation. In: LEITCH, T. (Org.). The Oxford Hand-
book of Adaptation Studies. New York: Oxford University Press, 2017. p. 459-476.
CLÜVER, C. On Gazer’s Encounters with Visual Art: Ekphrasis, Readers, Icono-
texts. In: KENNEDY, D.; MEEK, R. (Org.). Ekphrastic Encounters: New Interdis-
ciplinary Essays on Literature and the Visual Arts. Manchester: Manchester 
University Press, 2017. In press.
FRIED, M. Three American Painters: Kenneth Noland, Jules Olitski, Frank 
Stella. [1965.] In: FRIED, M. Art and Objecthood. Chicago: The University of 
Chicago Press, 1998. p. 213-265.


── PAGE 14 ──
43
DOSSIÊ
A NEW LOOK AT AN OLD TOPIC: EKPHRASIS REVISITED
TODAS AS LETRAS, São Paulo, v. 19, n. 1, p. 30-44, jan./abr. 2017
http://dx.doi.org/10.5935/1980-6914/letras.v19n1p30-44
GILBERT, A. (Org.). nichts für schnell-betrachter und bücher-blätterer: Eugen 
Gomringers Gemeinschafts-arbeiten mit bildenden Künstlern. Bielefeld: Kerber, 
2015. 
GOMRINGER, E. Untitled poem (außenrund). In: GILBERT, A. (Org.). nichts für 
schnell-betrachter und bücher-blätterer: Eugen Gomringers Gemeinschaftsarbe-
iten mit bildenden Künstlern. Bielefeld: Kerber, 2015. p. 77. 
GOMRINGER, E. das kreisspiel: zu zweit, zu dritt, zu viert. In: GILBERT, A. 
(Org.). nichts für schnell-betrachter und bücher-blätterer: Eugen Gomringers Ge-
meinschaftsarbeiten mit bildenden Künstlern. Bielefeld: Kerber, 2015. p. 208.
HEFFERNAN, J. A. W. Ekphrasis: Theory. In: RIPPL, G. (Org.). Handbook of 
Intermediality: Literature – Image – Sound – Music. Handbooks of English and 
American Studies. Berlin; Boston: De Gruyter, 2015. v. 1, p. 35-49. 
HEFFERNAN, J. A. W. Ekphrasis, Art Criticism, and the Poetry of Art. In: 
KARLSEN, O. (Org.). Krysninger: um moderne nordisk lyrikk. Oslo: Unipub for-
lag, 2008. p. 21-46.
HEFFERNAN, J. A. W. Museum of Words: The Poetics of Ekphrasis from Homer 
to Ashbery. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1993. 
HEFFERNAN, J. A. W. Speaking for Pictures: The Rhetoric of Art Criticism. 
Word & Image, v. 15, n. 1, p. 19-33, 1999. Rpt. in: HEFFERNAN, J. A. W. Cul-
tivating Picturacy: Visual Art and Verbal Interventions. Waco: Baylor University 
Press, 2006. p. 39-68. 
HEFFERNAN, J. A. W. Speaking for Pictures: Language and Abstract Art. In: 
HOMEM, R. C.; LAMBERT, M. de F. (Org.). Writing and Seeing: Essays on Word 
and Image. Amsterdam; New York: Rodopi, 2006. p. 25-44. Rpt. in modified 
form as: Reza, Pollock, Richter: Language and Abstract Art. In: HEFFERNAN, J. 
A. W. Cultivating Picturacy: Visual Art and Verbal Interventions. Waco: Baylor 
University Press, 2006. p. 287-309.
HOLLANDER, J. Edward Hopper’s Seven A. M. (1948). In: HOLLANDER, J. Tes-
serae. New York: Knopf, 1993. p. 10. Rpt. in LEVIN, G. (Org.). The Poetry of 
Solitude: A Tribute to Edward Hopper. New York: Universe, 1995. p. 26. 
HOLLANDER, J. The Gazer’s Spirit: Poems Speaking to Silent Works of Art. Chi-
cago: The University of Chicago Press, 1995.
KENNEDY, D. The Ekphrastic Encounter in Contemporary British Poetry and 
Elsewhere. Farnham, Surrey, UK; Burlington, VT: Ashgate, 2012. 
KENNEDY, D. Ekphrasis and Poetry. In: RIPPL, G. (Org.). Handbook of Interme-
diality: Literature – Image – Sound – Music. Handbooks of English and Ameri-
can Studies. Berlin; Boston: De Gruyter, 2015. v. 1, p. 82-91.
KRAUSS, R. E. Grids. In: The Originality of the Avant-Garde and Other Modernist 
Myths. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1986. 
KRIEGER, M. Ekphrasis: The Illusion of the Natural Sign. Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 1992.
MITCHELL, W. J. T. Iconology: Image, Text, Ideology. Chicago; London: The 
University of Chicago Press, 1986. 


── PAGE 15 ──
CLAUS CLÜVER
44
DOSSIÊ
TODAS AS LETRAS, São Paulo, v. 19, n. 1, p. 30-44, jan./abr. 2017
http://dx.doi.org/10.5935/1980-6914/letras.v19n1p30-44
MITCHELL, W. J. T. Ut Pictura Theoria: Abstract Painting and Language. In: 
MITCHELL, W. J. T. Picture Theory. Chicago; London: The University of Chicago 
Press, 1994. p. 213-239.
PRAGER, H.-G.; GOMRINGER, E. sieben begehren, Portfolio with 8 leaves, 77 x 
55.5 cm. Rehau: institut für konstruktive kunst und konkrete poesie, 2010. 
Edition of 7. Rpt. in GILBERT, A. (Org.). nichts für schnell-betrachter und bücher-
blätterer: Eugen Gomringers Gemeinschaftsarbeiten mit bildenden Künstlern. 
Bielefeld: Kerber, 2015. p. 207-211. 
RAJEWSKY, I. O. Border Talks: The Problematic Status of Media Borders in the 
Current Debate about Intermediality. In: ELLESTRÖM, L. (Org.). Media Borders, 
Multimodality and Intermediality. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2010. p. 51-80. 
RAJEWSKY, I. O. Intermediality, Intertextuality and Remediation: A Literary 
Perspective on Intermediality. Intermédialités/Intermedialities. (Special issue 
on: “Remédier/Remediation”, edited by P. Despoix and Y. Spielmann. Montreal, 
Centre de Recherche sur l’Intermédialité), n. 6, p. 43-64, 2005.
RIPPL, G. Beschreibungs-Kunst: Zur intermedialen Poetik angloamerikanischer 
Ikontexte (1880-2000). München: Fink, 2005. 
RIPPL, G. Introduction. In: RIPPL, G. (Org.). Handbook of Intermediality: Litera-
ture – Image – Sound – Music. Handbooks of English and American Studies. 
Berlin; Boston: De Gruyter, 2015. v. 1, p. 1-31.
RIPPL, G. Postcolonial Ekphrasis in the Contemporary Anglophone Indian 
Novel. In: RIPPL, G. (Org.). Handbook of Intermediality: Literature – Image – 
Sound – Music. Handbooks of English and American Studies. Berlin; Boston: 
De Gruyter, 2015. v. 1, p. 128-155.
RIPPL, G. (Org.). Handbook of Intermediality: Literature – Image – Sound – Music. 
Handbooks of English and American Studies. Berlin; Boston: De Gruyter, 2015. 
v. 1.
SENA, J. de. Arte de Música, 1968. In: Obras de Jorge de Sena: Poesia II. 2. ed. 
Lisboa: Edições 70, 1988. p. 163-212. Notas, p. 223-231. 
SONTAG, S. Against Interpretation. In: MEYER, J. (Org.). Minimalism. London: 
Phaidon, 2000. 
STEINBERG, L. Other Criteria. London: Oxford University Press, 1972.
TAMEN, P. Como se Constrói uma Casa. In: TAMEN, P. Depois de Ver. Lisboa: 
Quetzal Editores, 1995. p. 60.
WYSS, M. teilkreis-projektionen: zwölf variationen. Locarno: éditions Lafranca, 
1977.
Recebido em janeiro de 2017.
Aprovado em fevereiro de 2017.
