# Media Borders, Multimodality and Intermediality
# Source: 2010 Elleström.pdf
# BibTeX key: ellestrom_media_2010
# Zotero dir: 3127
# Extracted chars: 169270
# Format: PDF
============================================================

── PAGE 1 ──
PROOF
Contents
List of Figures
xii
Acknowledgements
xiii
Notes on Contributors
xiv
Introduction
1
Lars Elleström
Part I
Media, Modalities and Modes
1
The Modalities of Media: A Model for Understanding
Intermedial Relations
11
Lars Elleström
Part II
Media Borders of Qualiﬁed Media
2
Border Talks: The Problematic Status of Media Borders in the
Current Debate about Intermediality
51
Irina O. Rajewsky
3
Intermedial Topography and Metaphorical Interaction
69
Axel Englund
4
Intermedial Strategies in Multimedia Art
81
Christina Ljungberg
Part III
Combinations and Integrations of Media
5
‘Media’ before ‘Media’ were Invented: The Medieval Ballad
and the Romanesque Church
99
Sigurd Kværndrup
6
The Intermediality of Field Guides: Notes Towards a Theory
111
Håkan Sandgren
7
Media on the Edge of Nothingness: Visual Apostrophes in
Lettrism
124
Sami Sjöberg
v


── PAGE 2 ──
PROOF
vi
Contents
Part IV
Mediations and Transformations of Media
8
Penrose, ‘Seeing is Believing’: Intentionality, Mediation and
Comprehension in the Arts
137
Siglind Bruhn
9
Beyond Deﬁnition: A Pragmatic Approach to Intermediality
150
Valerie Robillard
10
Translating Sounds: Intermedial Exchanges in Amy Lowell’s
‘Stravinsky’s Three Pieces “Grotesques”, for String Quartet’
163
Regina Schober
11
‘Transgenic Art’: The Biopoetry of Eduardo Kac
175
Claus Clüver
12
Photo/graphic Traces in Dubravka Ugreši´c’s The Museum of
Unconditional Surrender
187
Katalin Sándor
13
The Dance of Intermediality: Attempt at a Semiotic Approach
of Medium Speciﬁcity and Intermediality in Film
199
Hajnal Király
14
Media in the Cinematic Imagination: Ekphrasis and the
Poetics of the In-Between in Jean-Luc Godard’s Cinema
211
Ágnes Peth˝o
Part V
The Borders of Media Borders
15
Heteromediality
225
Jørgen Bruhn
16
Intermediality Revisited: Some Reﬂections about Basic
Principles of this Axe de pertinence
237
Jürgen E. Müller
Index
253


── PAGE 3 ──
PROOF
1
The Modalities of Media: A Model for
Understanding Intermedial Relations
Lars Elleström
What is the problem?
Scholars have been debating the interrelations of the arts for centuries. Now,
in the age of electronic and digital media, the focus of the argumentation
has somewhat shifted to the intermedial relations between various arts and
media. One important move has been to acknowledge fully the materiality of
the arts: like other media, they are dependent on mediating substances. For
this reason, there is a point in not isolating the arts as something ethereal but
rather in seeing them as aesthetically developed forms of media. Still, most of
the issues discussed within the interart paradigm are also highly relevant to
intermedial studies. One such classical locus of the interart debate concerns
the relation between the arts of time (music, literature, ﬁlm) and the arts of
space (the visual arts). In the eighteenth century, Gotthold Ephraim Lessing
argued famously in Laocoön that there are, or rather should be, clear differ-
ences between poetry and painting,1 but for the moment there is a tendency
rather to deconstruct the dissimilarities of various arts and media. W. J. T.
Mitchell is perhaps the most inﬂuential contemporary critic of attempts
to ﬁnd clear boundaries between arts and media. Many important distinc-
tions have thus been made, and then successfully erased; much taxonomy
has been construed, and then torn down, and this process has led to many
valuable insights – Is that not enough? What is the problem?
The problem is that intermediality has tended to be discussed without
clariﬁcation of what a medium actually is. Without a more precise under-
standing of what a medium is, one cannot expect to comprehend what
intermediality is. This is not only a terminological problem. On the con-
trary, the understanding of what a medium is and what intermedial relations
actually consist of has vital implications for each and every inquiry in old
and new ﬁelds of study concerning the arts and media: ekphrasis, cinema,
illustration, visual poetry, remediation, adaptation, multimedia and so on.
I ﬁnd it as unsatisfying to continue talking about ‘writing’, ‘ﬁlm’, ‘perfor-
mance’, ‘music’ and ‘television’ as if they were like different persons that
11


── PAGE 4 ──
PROOF
12
Media, Modalities and Modes
can be married and divorced2 as to ﬁnd repose in a belief that all media are
always fundamentally blended in a hermaphroditical way. The crucial ‘inter’
of intermediality is a bridge, but what does it bridge over? If all media were
fundamentally different, it would be hard to ﬁnd any interrelations at all;
if they were fundamentally similar, it would be equally hard to ﬁnd some-
thing that is not already interrelated. Media, however, are both different and
similar, and intermediality must be understood as a bridge between medial
differences that is founded on medial similarities.
The most important aim of this essay is to present a theoretical frame-
work that explains and describes how media are related to each other: what
they have in common, in what ways they differ and how these differences
are bridged over by intermediality. In order to accomplish this, it must be
understood that the concept of medium generally includes several types or
levels of mediality that have to be correlated with each other. ‘Medium’,
of course, is a term widely employed and it would be pointless to try to
ﬁnd a straightforward deﬁnition that covers all the various notions that
lurk behind the different uses of the word. Dissimilar notions of medium
and mediality are at work within different ﬁelds of research and there is
no reason to interfere with these notions as long as they fulﬁl their speciﬁc
tasks. Instead, I will circumscribe a concept that is applicable to the issue
of intermediality. Since intermediality will be understood as a general con-
dition for understanding communicative and aesthetic mechanisms, events
and devices, rather than a peripheral exception to ‘regular’ mediality, such a
concept must actually include most of the media notions circulating in the
academic world. Hence, I will not produce a two-line deﬁnition of ‘medium’.
I ﬁnd such deﬁnitions counterproductive when it comes to complex con-
cepts and any clear-cut deﬁnition of medium can only capture fragments of
the whole conceptual web. Instead, I will try to form a model that preserves
the term medium and yet qualiﬁes its use in relation to the different aspects
of the conceptual web of mediality. As a term, ‘medium’ should thus be
divided into subcategories to cover the many interrelated aspects of the mul-
tifaceted concept of medium and mediality. As my arguments unfold, I will
distinguish between ‘basic media’, ‘qualiﬁed media’ and ‘technical media’.
Basic and qualiﬁed media are abstract categories that help us understand
how media types are formed by very different sorts of qualities, whereas
technical media are the very tangible devices needed to materialize instances
of media types. Consequently, when talking about a medium without spec-
iﬁcations, the term can refer to both a media category and a speciﬁc media
realization.
Evidently, it is important to note that qualiﬁed, basic and technical media
are not three separate types of media. Instead, they are three complementary,
theoretical aspects of what constitutes media and mediality. The wide con-
cept of medium that will be presented here thus comprises several intimately
related yet divergent notions that will be terminologically distinguished.


── PAGE 5 ──
PROOF
Lars Elleström
13
I believe that intermediality cannot fully be understood without grasping
the fundamental conditions of every single medium and these conditions
constitute a complex network of both tangible qualities of media and various
perceptual and interpretive operations performed by the recipients of media.
For my purpose, media deﬁnitions that deal only with the physical aspects
of mediality are too narrow, as are media deﬁnitions that strongly emphasize
the social construction of media conceptions. Instead, I will emphasize the
critical meeting of the material, the perceptual and the social. Media of pro-
duction and storage are not really relevant for the forthcoming discussion
and although I recognize the relevance of the aspect of communication in
its widest sense, my aim is not to discuss intermediality within the frame-
work of communication models. Instead, I want to treat mediality from a
hermeneutical point of view. I bracket much of the conditions of media
production and focus on the perception, conception and interpretation of
media as material interfaces situated in social, historical, communicative and
aesthetic circumstances.
The material of my theoretical framework consists of the notions of
modality and mode. Intermedial studies have their historical roots in aes-
thetics, philosophy, semiotics, comparative literature, media studies and, of
course, interart studies.3 During the last few decades, however, the notion of
multimodality has also gained ground, while the roots of this new plant have
grown in different soils; social semiotics, education, medicine and language
and communication studies. There are seldom cross-references between the
two research ﬁelds of intermedial and multimodal studies and the notions
of intermediality and multimodality are surprisingly seldom related to each
other.4 Also, in qualiﬁed texts of recent date, it is far from clear how ‘inter-
medial’, ‘multimodal’, ‘intermodal’ and ‘multimedial’ are related.5 Since it is
a waste of intellectual energy to develop two closely related research ﬁelds
separately, it is a matter of priority to straighten things out as far as core
concepts and basic terminology are concerned.
What is a medium?
Medium means ‘middle’, ‘interval’, ‘interspace’ and so on. The standard
deﬁnition found in dictionaries stresses that a medium is a channel for
the mediation of information and entertainment. Art might be seen as a
complex blend of information and entertainment (Horace’s utile dulci) so
it should be fully possible to include the art forms among other media. As
we know, however, the term ‘medium’ is used in many related but different
ways and it is also applied in contexts that are not relevant here. According
to Marshall McLuhan’s inﬂuential ideas, media are the ‘extensions of man’
and he suggestively argues that not only the spoken word, the photograph,
comics, the typewriter and television are media, but also are money, wheels
and axes.6 Within the framework of McLuhan’s own sociological theory, this


── PAGE 6 ──
PROOF
14
Media, Modalities and Modes
notion works rather well, but in order to take the step from ‘medium’ to
‘intermediality’, more accuracy is needed.
The term ‘modality’ is related to ‘mode’ and these terms are also widely
used in different ﬁelds. A ‘mode’ is a way to be or to do things. In the con-
text of media studies and linguistics, ‘multimodality’ sometimes refers to the
combination of, say, text, image and sound, and sometimes to the combi-
nation of sense faculties; the auditory, the visual, the tactile and so forth.7
In the work of Gunther Kress and Theo van Leeuwen, a mode is understood
as any semiotic resource, in a very broad sense, that produces meaning in
a social context; the verbal, the visual, language, image, music, sound, ges-
ture, narrative, colour, taste, speech, touch, plastic and so on. This approach
to multimodality has its pragmatic advantages but it produces a rather indis-
tinct set of modes that are very hard to compare since they overlap in many
ways that are in dire need of further theoretical discussion.8
It is no wonder, then, that the discourses on media and modalities tend to
be either separated or mixed up. Why bother to combine, or to keep apart,
notions that seem to be fuzzy in rather similar ways? A medium is a channel,
one might say, and of course there are many media, that is, modes of medi-
ating information and entertainment. In ordinary situations, this language
use is rather unproblematic. If one wants to understand the complexity of
individual media in a more precise way, however, I think it is wise to dif-
ferentiate between medium/intermediality and mode/multimodality. As far
as I can tell, there is nothing in the etymology of the words ‘medium’ and
‘mode’, or in the established conceptual uses of them, that clearly deter-
mines how they should be related to each other, so here I will see it as my
task to raise a theoretical construction and propose how to use the central
terms in relation to each other.
Earlier efforts to describe the relations between different media and art
forms as a rule start off with conceptual units such as image, music, text,
ﬁlm, verbal media or visual media, presuming that it is appropriate to com-
pare these entities. The complexity resulting from such comparisons is often
slightly confusing, I would say, because of two limitations. The ﬁrst problem
is that the units compared are often treated as fundamentally different media
with little or nothing in common. Thus, every intermedial relation seems
to be more or less an anomaly where the supposedly essentially different
characteristics of allegedly separate media are presumed to be more or less
transformed, combined or blended in a unique way. Mitchell has success-
fully criticized this way of thinking by pointing to the way various important
traits are in fact shared by art forms that are generally seen as opposites, yet
Mitchell’s discourse is also paradoxically but profoundly trapped in the tra-
dition of treating art forms as separate entities. In spite of the efforts to erase
most of the differences between poetry and painting, he anthropomorphizes
the two art forms and emphasizes the ‘struggle’ between them, which makes
it difﬁcult to grasp the exact nature of the similarities of media as conceived


── PAGE 7 ──
PROOF
Lars Elleström
15
by Mitchell.9 Media are both similar and different and one cannot compare
media without clarifying which aspects are relevant to the comparison and
exactly how these aspects are related to each other.10
The second problem with many comparisons between conceptual units
such as ‘dance’ and ‘literature’ is that the materiality of media is generally not
distinguished from the perception of media. This is understandable since it is,
in practice, impossible to separate the two. For human beings, nothing exists
outside perception. Nevertheless, it is crucial to discriminate theoretically
between the material and the perception of the material if one wants to
understand how media can be related to each other. One must be able to
determine to what extent certain qualities belong to the material aspects
of a medium and to what extent they are part of the perception. This is a
slippery business, no doubt, but one must acknowledge that, for instance,
the quality of ‘time’ in a movie is not the same as the ‘time’ that is necessary
to contemplate a still photograph, and that ‘time’ can be said to be present
in many forms in one and the same medium. If one avoids taking notice of
this intricacy, one is left with a featureless mass of only seemingly identical
media that cannot be compared properly.
I therefore consider it a matter of urgency to put forward a model that
starts at the other end, so to speak: not with the units of established media
forms, or with efforts to distinguish between speciﬁc types of intermedial
relations between these recognized media, but with the basic categories of
features, qualities and aspects of all media. My point of departure will be
what I call the modalities of media. The modalities are the essential cor-
nerstones of all media without which mediality cannot be comprehended
and together they build a medial complex integrating materiality, percep-
tion and cognition. Separately, these modalities constitute complex ﬁelds of
research and they are not related to the established media types in any def-
inite or deﬁnitive way; however, I believe that they are indispensable in all
efforts to describe the character of every single medial expression. They are
all very familiar although their interrelations have not been systematically
accounted for. I call them the material modality, the sensorial modality, the
spatiotemporal modality and the semiotic modality, and they are to be found
on a scale ranging from the tangible to the perceptual and the conceptual.
Media and art forms are constantly being described and deﬁned on the
basis of one or more of these modalities.11 The categories of materiality, time
and space, the visual and the auditory, and natural and conventional signs,
have been reshaped over and over again, but they tend to be mixed up in
fundamental ways. Hence, in insightful essays, such as Jiˇrí Veltruský’s ‘Com-
parative Semiotics of Art’, it remains unclear what the ‘material’ of an art
form is.12 According to Veltruský, materials can be divided into the ‘audi-
tory and visual’; the material of music is said to be ‘tones’ and the material
of literature is said to be ‘language’. Furthermore, the material of literature
is supposed to oscillate ‘between materiality and immateriality’.13 Although


── PAGE 8 ──
PROOF
16
Media, Modalities and Modes
this categorization is fairly representative, it is not at all illuminating. The
category of ‘material’ is fundamentally untenable since it includes aspects of
the arts that cannot be treated as equals; tones, language and even the imma-
terial. ‘Tones’ must be seen as related primarily to the sensorial modality
whereas ‘language’ must be understood in semiotic terms; however, language
actually also consists of some sorts of ‘tones’. What the ‘immaterial’ material
is, I do not know. Perhaps the most common mistake in intermedial com-
parisons is to confuse the notions of ‘visual’ and ‘iconic’: the visual is about
using a speciﬁc sense, as will be discussed later, whereas the iconic is semiosis
based on similarity (that only sometimes can be seen).
I thus propose that we distinguish between the four modalities mentioned
above to enable a clearer view of how media are constituted by both the
physical realities and the cognitive functions of human beings. I want to
stress that all media, as I understand the concept, are necessarily realized in
the form of all four modalities; hence, it is not enough to consider only one
or a few of them if one wants to grasp the character of a particular medium.
In this respect, there is a fundamental difference between my approach and
the systematic, often hierarchic, but necessarily simplistic classiﬁcations and
divisions of the arts that were put forward from the eighteenth century
and well into the twentieth century.14 The proposed model can be used to
highlight both crucial divergences and fundamental parallels between all
sorts and variants of media forms, which gives a ﬁrm ground for understand-
ing, describing and interpreting the most elementary intermedial relations.
Of course, the complexity of the innumerable intermedial relations that can
be derived from the four modalities, not least from the semiotic modality,
can only be hinted at.
When I speak of modalities henceforth, I mean these four necessary cate-
gories in the area of the medium ranging from the material to the mental,
and when I speak of modes, I mean the variants of the modalities as described
below. Entities such as ‘text’, ‘music’, ‘gesture’ or ‘image’ are not seen as
modalities or modes. The modalities are obviously interrelated and depen-
dent on each other in many ways, but nevertheless they can be rather clearly
separated theoretically. Also, the modes are entangled with each other in
many different ways, depending on the character of the medium.
Before discussing the four modalities, a preliminary distinction must be
made. All media need technical media to be realized. Our knowledge of the
outer world is always limited by and dependent on our senses but, unless
one gives oneself up to solipsism, one must assume that all media have a
material ground. The notion of a technical medium will be discussed and
deﬁned later in this essay, since a more delineated explanation of what a
technical medium is requires an understanding of the four modalities; here,
it must sufﬁce to say that a technical medium is not the same as the material
modality. The modes of the material modality, like the modes of the three
other modalities, must be understood as latent properties of media, whereas


── PAGE 9 ──
PROOF
Lars Elleström
17
the technical medium is the actual material medium, the ‘form’, that realizes
and manifests the latent properties of media, the ‘content’.
The four modalities of media
The order in which the four modalities will be presented is not arbitrary.
I would not say that the order from the material, the sensorial and the spa-
tiotemporal to the semiotic is ‘temporal’ or ‘hierarchical’ in any clear-cut
way, but I do suggest that there is a point in starting with the material aspect
since this is what would exist even if all living creatures were to be wiped
out from the surface of our planet. The sensorial is the next stage since it is
a prerequisite for the more ‘advanced’ spatiotemporal and semiotic modali-
ties. Without sensory impressions there cannot be any conceptions of time,
space or meaning. The semiotic modality is the ‘last’ modality since it can
be said to include, or at least be based on, the other three. It is hence also
the most complex modality.
The material modality can thus be deﬁned as the latent corporeal interface
of the medium. The material interface of television programs and motion
pictures, for instance, consists of a more or less ﬂat surface of changing
images (in a wide sense of the notion) combined with sound waves. The
interface of most kinds of written text also consists of a ﬂat surface, but the
appearance of the surface is not changing. The interface of music and radio
theatre consists of sound waves. Regular theatre, on the other hand, must be
understood as a combination of several interfaces: sound waves, surfaces that
are both ﬂat and not ﬂat and that have both a changing and static character,
and also the very speciﬁc corporeal interface of human bodies. The interface
of sculptures normally consists of extended, generally solid materiality.
The materialities of media can differ in many ways that cannot always
be clearly separated, of course, but I think it is proper to make an approx-
imate distinction between three modes of the material modality: human
bodies, other materiality of a demarcated character such as ﬂat surfaces
and three-dimensional objects, and material manifestations of a less clearly
demarcated character such as sound waves and different sorts of laser or light
projections.
The sensorial modality is the physical and mental acts of perceiving the
present interface of the medium through the sense faculties. Media cannot
be realized: that is, cannot mediate, unless they are grasped by one or more
of our senses. Usually, we talk about the ﬁve senses of humans, which may
here be described as the ﬁve main modes of the sensorial modality: seeing,
hearing, feeling, tasting and smelling. Still, the issue is, as usual, more com-
plex. At least three levels of the sensorial must be discerned. The ﬁrst level is
sense-data that originate from objects, phenomena and occurrences but that
can never be captured in isolation without a perceiving and interpreting
agent. Often, but far from always, sense-data tend to cause inter-subjective


── PAGE 10 ──
PROOF
18
Media, Modalities and Modes
sensations. The sense-data of media come from the realized material
interface. The second level of the sensorial consists of our receptors: cells that
when stimulated cause nerve impulses that are transferred to a nervous sys-
tem. The third level is the sensation, meaning the experienced effect of the
stimulation. All our sensations consist of integrated experiences of the way
a variety of receptors perceive and interpret an array of sense-data.
The exact nature of sense-data and sensations, and the relation between
them, is very much disputed, whereas the physical receptors have been stud-
ied and described in detail.15 Exteroceptors register changes in the external
environment, interoceptors are sensible to the internal conditions and proprio-
ceptors give us information regarding length and tension in muscle ﬁbres and
sinews. Our ﬁve senses are thus actually, to be more precise, the ﬁve sense
organs that register changes in the exterior environment: eyes, ears, olfactory
organ, gustatory organ and skin.16 For the moment we witness an increased
interest in the interoceptors and the proprioceptors but most media are still
primarily understood as exterior channels of information. Chieﬂy sight and
hearing, the two cognitively most advanced faculties, deserve our attention
in the context of media and arts, but not exclusively. Music and speech are
ﬁrst and foremost heard, but there is a clear physical link between exterior
hearing and inner balance that cannot be ignored. A sculpture is mainly
seen, but it is impossible to grasp its entity without moving and hence also
involving the inner senses. Even if one does not actually touch its surface
one sees and indirectly feels its tactile qualities. The reactivation of memo-
ries of sensorial experiences plays a certain part in the perception of media.
Reading a text, for instance, often involves the creation and recollections of
visual experiences that are very remote from the way the alphabetic letters
look, and it also involves an inner hearing of the sounds of the words. New
sensations are thus frequently a complex web of perceived and conceived
sense-data combined with retrieved sensations.
Sense-data cannot be grasped, cannot be conceived as sensation, unless
they are given some sort of form, Gestalt, in the act of perception. The
spatiotemporal modality of media covers the structuring of the sensorial
perception of sense-data of the material interface into experiences and con-
ceptions of space and time. Media, like all objects and phenomena, receive
their multilayered spatiotemporal qualities in the act of perception and
interpretation; thus, the spatiotemporal cannot be identiﬁed with the prop-
erties covered by the material modality, although there is certainly a strong
link between these two modalities. I basically adhere to Kant’s idea that space
and time are a priori sensory intuitions ‘that must precede all empirical intu-
ition (i.e., the perception of actual objects)’.17 Thus, because of cognitive
conditions, all media necessarily in some respect receive both spatial and
temporal qualities. Furthermore, the principles of physics teach that the spa-
tiotemporal relationship is indeed very complex: time and space interact not
only on the level of perception but as physical phenomena as such, but we


── PAGE 11 ──
PROOF
Lars Elleström
19
do not have to bother about that when it comes to media modalities. In this
context, it sufﬁces to state that all media have aspects of the two basic modes
of space and time which must theoretically be kept apart in some respects
and brought together in other respects. The closer we come to the sense-data,
the more time and space seem to be able to be considered separately and the
more they can be said to be part of the material modality; the closer we come
to the sensations, the more the very distinction between space and time loses
its relevance. This critical difference is often overlooked, which has led to
some confusion in the discussion of intermediality.
Spatiotemporal perception can be said to consist of four dimensions;
width, height, depth and time. The corporeal interface of a photograph
has only two dimensions; width and height. A sculpture has three mate-
rial dimensions, all of them spatial; width, height and depth. A dance has
four dimensions; width, height, depth and time. Every dance performance
has a beginning, an extension and an end situated in the dimension of time,
while a photograph, as long as it exists, simply exists. If one closes one’s
eyes in the middle of a dance performance, something is missed and the
spatiotemporal form cannot be grasped in its entirety. If one closes one’s
eyes while watching a photograph, nothing is missed and the spatial form
remains intact. In this respect, considering the material modality through
the spatiotemporal modality, there are very distinct and certainly relevant
spatiotemporal differences between media.
Hence, media that lack the fourth dimension, time, can be said to be
static, considered as material objects: their sense-data remain the same. For
media that do incorporate the dimension of time in their physical manifesta-
tion, meaning that their sense-data change, some further distinctions can be
made. Motion pictures and recorded music, for instance, have ﬁxed sequen-
tiality. Hypertexts and much music accompanying computer games can be
said to have partially ﬁxed sequentiality. Mobile sculptures, truly improvised
music and a performance broadcast live on television have (at least poten-
tially) non-ﬁxed sequentiality. There are certainly no deﬁnite borders between
these categories, and for some media one must also consider the semiotic
modality in order to understand the spatiotemporal nature of the medium.
Listening to a recorded poem is like listening to recorded music: the inter-
face of the medium must be said to have ﬁxed sequentiality. Listening to a
poem being read live is to perceive a medium hovering between the ﬁxed
sequence and the non-ﬁxed sequence. Reading a printed poem is to per-
ceive a medium with a clearly spatial material interface, but as soon as the
conventional semiotic aspect of language is considered, the perception also
incorporates temporality and ﬁxed sequentiality (for most standard poems)
or at least partly ﬁxed sequentiality (for poems lacking clearly distinguish-
able lines). However, this kind of sequentiality, being attributed not to the
material interface but to the realization of sequential sign systems, has a less
deﬁnite character.


── PAGE 12 ──
PROOF
20
Media, Modalities and Modes
The most basic form of spatiality is hence the manifestation of the mate-
rial modality in terms of physical width, height and depth, but that is far
from the whole story since our cognition to a large extent works in terms
of spatiality. Also, abstract concepts and experiences of time have spatial
characteristics. Thinking in terms of spatiality is a fundamental trait of
the human mind that has a signiﬁcant effect on the way we perceive and
describe media. Experiences and interpretations of, for instance, narratives
and music are also conceived of as spatial relations and patterns.18
Some such conceptions are closely connected to certain types of primarily
visual sense-data. The notion of virtual space covers the effects of media that
are not three-dimensionally spatial on the level of the material interface but
that nevertheless receive a spatial character of depth in the perception and
interpretation. Paintings and photographs actually have only two dimen-
sions, width and height, but often, by means of resemblance of certain visual
qualities in the perceived world they give the illusion of a third, depth,
which creates a virtual space in the mind of the beholder. The interface of
a movie, correspondingly, has three dimensions: width, height and (ﬁxed
sequential) time, but usually an illusion of depth is created. The virtual space
created by a computer is undoubtedly slightly different, since we can choose
to a certain extent how to move within it, but it nevertheless consists of
width, height and (partly ﬁxed sequential) time, together also creating the
illusion of depth. Indeed, verbal narratives also create various sorts of virtual
spatiality in the mind of the listener or reader – not only abstract, conceptual
spatiality but virtual worlds within which the reader can navigate.19
Consequently, at least three levels of spatiality in media can be discerned:
space as a trait of the interface of the medium (the material modality consid-
ered through the spatiotemporal modality), space as a fundamental aspect
of all cognition and space as an interpretive aspect of what the medium
represents (virtual space).
Temporality in media can be understood in a similar way. The most fun-
damental form of time consists of the way the medium’s material modality
is manifested through its sense-data. Some media have corporeal interfaces
that are simply not temporal. Yet, it is important to note that all media are
obviously realized in time: all perception and interpretation of media and
what they mediate are necessarily inscribed in time, which complicates the
modal relations between time and space. Also, media that are not basically
temporal become situated in time as soon as they catch our attention, which
of course has implications for our conception and interpretation of such
media.
As a counterpart to virtual space, the notion of virtual time might further-
more be introduced. Some speciﬁc media have spatial characteristics that
encourage the interpretation of the spatial in terms of time passing. To some
extent, there are conventions that make us look at pictures, in a comic
strip for instance, in a certain temporal order. However, this is not a case
of virtual time but rather an instance of pictorial sequentiality produced by


── PAGE 13 ──
PROOF
Lars Elleström
21
merging conventions of decoding symbolic and iconic signs. Virtual time
is rather characterized by the capacity of individual pictures to depict not
only one static moment but a series of occurrences.20 Interpretations of still
images of what we, on iconic grounds, take to be moving objects or creatures
always include an interpretation of where the object or creature was ‘before’
and ‘after’ the frozen time in the image.21 Some still images, for instance
photographs, may have qualities in the image, such as objects represented
with blurred contours or stretched and transparent objects, that we take to
be indexical depictions of objects moving in space and time.22 These ‘illu-
sions’ of partly ﬁxed sequential time might be called virtual time, which is
the case also for all sorts of time represented by verbal narration. In short,
virtual space and virtual time can be said to be manifest in the perception
and interpretation of a medium when what is taken to be the represented
spatiotemporal state is not the same as the spatiotemporal state of the repre-
senting material modality considered through the spatiotemporal modality.23
Again, we have at least three levels of temporality in media: time as a trait of
the interface of the medium (the material modality considered through the
spatiotemporal modality), time as a necessary condition of all perception
and time as an interpretive aspect of what the medium represents (virtual
time).24
Consequently, there are certainly fundamental differences between media
when it comes to time and space. If one does not acknowledge these dif-
ferences, one cannot understand the complexity of interpreting media in
terms of clashes, fusions and mutual exchanges between the categories of
time and space. The difference between media with various forms of spa-
tiotemporal interfaces is never dissolved, of course, but it is certainly crucial
to note the tension created in a medium lacking, for instance, temporal qual-
ities in the interface, and yet provoking temporal aspects in the perception
and interpretation.
So far nothing has been said about meaning, which I think primarily
belongs to the semiotic modality. Since the world is meaningless in itself,
meaning must be understood as the product of a perceiving and conceiving
subject situated in social circumstances. All meaning is the result of an inter-
preting mind attributing signiﬁcance to states of affairs, actions, occurrences
and artefacts. In its widest sense, semiotics is a theoretical ﬁeld aiming at
understanding how the processes of signiﬁcation work. For me, the most
proliﬁc endeavours of semiotics are those bordering on hermeneutics, such
as the pragmatic sign discussions of Charles Sanders Peirce. Following Peirce,
meaning can be described as the result of sign functions, and although there
are no signs until some interpreter has attributed signiﬁcance to them, one
can distinguish between different sorts of signs, or sign functions.
The material interfaces of media have no meaning in themselves, of
course, but the process of interpretation already begins in the act of
perception. Conception and cognition do not come after perception; rather,
all our sensations are the results of an interpreting, meaning-seeking mind.


── PAGE 14 ──
PROOF
22
Media, Modalities and Modes
The moment we become aware of a visual sensation, for instance, the sen-
sation is already meaningful at a basic level. Seeing a dancer is to become
aware of a visual sensation of a body being inscribed in a spatiotemporal
continuum. The sensation may also include apprehended similarities with
other phenomena in the world and gestures that we recognize from other
performances. The dancer may wave her arms like a bird, jump like a frog
and then bow. What we take to be imitations of animals may be described
as iconic sign functions, whereas the bow is primarily a conventional sign
denoting ‘the end’.
The semiotic modality thus involves the creation of meaning in the
spatiotemporally conceived medium by way of different sorts of think-
ing and sign interpretation. The creation of meaning already starts in the
unconscious apprehension and arrangement of sense-data perceived by the
receptors and it continues in the conscious act of ﬁnding relevant con-
nections within the spatiotemporal structure of the medium and between
the medium and the surrounding world. There are two different but com-
plementary ways of thinking: on the one hand, some cognitive functions
are mainly directed by propositional representations, while other cogni-
tive functions mainly rely on pictorial representations.25 Brain research has
shown that to a great extent the two ways of thinking can be located in
the two cerebral hemispheres. We think both in an abstract way and in a
concrete (visual and spatial) way. These interrelated but nevertheless differ-
ent ways of cognition are deeply correlated, I would say, with the semiotic
categories. Earlier, it was common to distinguish between conventional or
arbitrary signs and natural signs. Peirce’s most important trichotomy – sym-
bol, index and icon – has the advantage of avoiding the slightly misleading
idea that some signs exist ‘in nature’, but obviously the symbol is a con-
ventional sign, as Peirce states, and the index and the icon are in a way
natural signs. The indexical sign function is based on cause and closeness,
while iconicity is based on similarity: capacities that are part of the outer
world as it is perceived and conceived by us.26 In semiotic terms, thinking
based on propositional representations can be described as meaning cre-
ated by conventional, symbolic sign functions, whereas thinking based on
pictorial representations can be described as meaning created by indexical
and iconic sign functions. The indexical and the iconic sign functions are
deeply related to the way the mind conceives sense-data as spatiotempo-
ral structures, which is why especially this kind of meaning is the result
of interpretation also on the subliminal level. The spatiotemporal struc-
tures conceived by our mind are ‘designed’ to be meaningful – not in a
propositional way, but in a pictorial way.
I thus propose that convention (symbolic signs), resemblance (iconic
signs) and contiguity (indexical signs) should be seen as the three main
modes of the semiotic modality. According to Peirce, who stresses that the
determinate aspect of all signs are ‘in the mind’ of the interpreter, the


── PAGE 15 ──
PROOF
Lars Elleström
23
three modes of signiﬁcation are always mixed, but often one of them can
be said to dominate.27 In most written texts, the symbolic sign functions
of the letters and words dominate the signiﬁcation process. Instrumental
music and all kinds of visual images (for instance, drawings, ﬁgures, tables
and photographs) are generally dominated by iconic signs, although pho-
tos also have an important indexical character. The iconic qualities of music
and images differ, of course, since the musical signs are auditory signs that
mainly refer to motions, emotions, bodily experiences and cognitive struc-
tures, while the visual signs of images largely refer to other visual entities,
but all of these sign functions are based on resemblance.28 The semiotic char-
acter of all media is exceedingly complex but there is no doubt about the
basic semiotic differences between, for instance, a written text and a moving
image.
These semiotic modes, together with the spatiotemporal, the sensorial
and the material modes, form the speciﬁc character of every medium. Let
us brieﬂy and rudimentarily examine a few examples. Traditional sculpture
has a three-dimensional, solid and static material interface. It is primar-
ily perceived visually but it also has tactile qualities. Generally, the iconic
sign function dominates. An animated movie consists of a ﬁxed sequence
of moving images and sounds. Its corporeal interface is a ﬂat surface with
visual qualities combined with sound waves, and the combination of two-
dimensional images and sound often creates an effect of virtual space. The
images are ﬁrst and foremost iconic and they lack the speciﬁc indexical char-
acter of images produced by ordinary movie cameras. The sound generally
consists of voices, sound effects and music: the musical sounds, but often
also much of the voice qualities, are very much iconic, while the parts of
the voices that can be discerned as language are mainly decoded as conven-
tional signs. Printed poetry has a solid, two-dimensional material interface,
or a sequential combination of such interfaces (if realized in the technical
medium of a book). It is perceived by the eyes, but also when read silently
it becomes apparent that it also has latent auditory qualities in the conven-
tional system of signiﬁcation called language. Most poetry gains its meaning
through these conventional signs, but there may also be substantial por-
tions of iconicity in both the visual form of the text and the silent, inner
sound experiences produced by the mind. In terms of spatiotemporality,
printed poetry is essentially spatial. Very rarely, virtual space is perceived
as a result of illusive depth in the two-dimensional visual appearance of the
poem, whereas virtual space in the sense of illusionary worlds is often cre-
ated. Printed poems that are dominated by readable words, rather than, for
instance, clusters of letters, are indirectly (partly) sequential since the con-
ventional signs (partly) determine the temporal realization of the written
language.
As one can see from these few examples, the modes of different media
clearly differ and the modalities always interact in more or less complex


── PAGE 16 ──
PROOF
24
Media, Modalities and Modes
ways. Since the modalities cannot be seen as isolated entities, the proposed
model offers no simple, mechanical way of checking off the modes of the
modalities, one after another, but it suggests a method of investigating
minutely the features of various media and how they may be interpreted.
The model roughly supports ideas about media always containing other
media (McLuhan29 ), or media always being mixed media (Mitchell30), but
it also accounts for, in some detail, what it can mean to say that media are
always entangled in each other, and in which respects, in fact, media are
not contained by or mixed with other media: it is about media necessar-
ily sharing the four basic modalities, but having the shifting modes of the
modalities only more or less in common; it is also about seemingly having
modes in common when in fact many media features come into existence
on different levels, ranging from the material interface to the perception and
interpretation of the medium.
There are thus media similarities and media dissimilarities. All media are
mixed in different ways. Every medium consists of a fusion of modes that are
partly, and in different degrees of palpability, shared by other media. Every
medium has the capacity of mediating only certain aspects of the total real-
ity. Since the world, or rather our perception and conception of the world,
is utterly multimodal, all media are more or less multimodal on the level
of at least some of the four modalities, meaning that they in some respect
include, for instance, both the visual and the auditory mode, both the iconic
and the symbolic mode, or both the spatial and the temporal mode (materi-
ally or virtually). I think it is fair to say that all media are multimodal as far
as the spatiotemporal and the semiotic modalities are concerned, whereas
some media, such as computer games and theatre, are multimodal on the
level of all four modalities.
The two qualifying aspects of media
The four modalities are thus necessary aspects of all conceivable media,
but it is not always sufﬁcient to consider only the modes of the modali-
ties to reach a proper understanding of how media are actually realized and
understood. A deeper understanding of individual media realizations, their
inﬁnitely many qualities and their way of taking part in a world of constant
change, requires additional perspectives. There are at least two other aspects
involved in media constructions and media deﬁnitions. These aspects com-
plement the modalities, but they are also to some extent involved in the
character of the modes. I propose they be called qualifying aspects of media.
The ﬁrst of these two qualifying aspects is the origin, delimitation and use
of media in speciﬁc historical, cultural and social circumstances. This may be
called the contextual qualifying aspect. Modal combinations and blends can be
performed in very many ways and often there is no manner of automatically
deciding, on the basis of the modal properties, where the limits of a medium


── PAGE 17 ──
PROOF
Lars Elleström
25
are to be found. That can be determined only by way of investigating his-
torically determined practices, discourses and conventions. We tend to talk
about a medium as something that begins to be used in a certain way, or
gains certain qualities, at a certain time and in a certain cultural and social
context.31 ‘Visual art’, ‘Morse messages’, ‘sign language’ and ‘e-mail’ are not
eternal media although they may be neatly described as far as the modal
properties are concerned – they appear and (perhaps eventually) disappear
and they are intelligible only in certain cultural and social contexts. Some-
times it is a more or less radical change on the material and technical level,
such as the invention of a new printing technique or a new technological
device, that triggers the genesis of what is taken to be new media. Sometimes
it is rather old techniques that are seen as new media when adopted in new
contexts, as when photographs are exhibited at galleries and museums or
when letters are used to perform ‘mail art’.
The second of the two qualifying aspects that deﬁne media includes aes-
thetic and communicative characteristics. This may be called the operational
qualifying aspect.32 There is a strong tendency towards treating a medium
as a medium, or an art form as one form of art, only when certain qual-
itative aspects can be identiﬁed. Such aspects are, of course, not eternally
inscribed but formed by conventions.33 In fact, Lessing’s notorious assertions
concerning the rigorous difference between poetry and painting are clearly
normative and deal with qualifying aspects of the arts of time and space.
Lessing’s claims regarding very distinct differences between the temporal
art of poetry representing action and the spatial art of painting represent-
ing objects do not really concern the basic, modal aspects of media. He
recognizes important semiotic differences between the arts, of course, but
constantly demonstrates not least how (allegedly bad) poetry can represent
objects. Poetry, however, should not be as ‘speech and its signs in general’
he claims.34 According to Lessing, then, the restrictions concerning spa-
tiality and temporality in poetry and painting, respectively, are primarily
a question of qualifying aspects.
Another example of how the operational qualifying aspect works would
be ‘cinema’ which, it has been argued, did not become ‘cinema’ the day the
technique was invented.35 Cinema, like other new media, borrowed aesthetic
and communicative characteristics belonging to old media, and although
the ﬁrst ﬁlms also had distinct communicative and aesthetic characteris-
tics, of course, it took a while before the many qualifying characteristics
of the mediated content developed into recognizable media forms. Eventu-
ally, there came to be two notions attached to the same term: cinema as a
set of techniques and cinema as a multifaceted qualiﬁed medium developed
within the frames of, but not determined by, the technical aspects.36 Music,
on the other hand, can be mediated by a variety of technical media, but most
people would not include simply any kind of sound in the notion of music.
Music, as an art form, a qualiﬁed medium, must be produced within assured


── PAGE 18 ──
PROOF
26
Media, Modalities and Modes
communicative circumstances and fulﬁl certain conventional aesthetic crite-
ria to be accepted as music. These circumstances and criteria vary, no doubt,
but if they were to be annihilated, few people would ﬁnd it meaningful still
to talk about the medium of music.
Dance is also a qualiﬁed medium governed by aesthetic standards, yet this
art form is closely related to gesture, which might be seen as a qualiﬁed
medium of another kind. The primary modes involved in both dance and
gesture are the body, visuality and spatiotemporality. As far as the semiotic
modality is concerned, both dance and gesture include iconic and symbolic
signs. I presume there is a tendency towards more indexical sign-functions
in gesture but the main difference between dance and gesture is to be
found in the operational qualifying aspect: dance adheres to conventions
of aesthetic expression whereas gesture is primarily part of communicative
situations.
These two qualifying aspects often interact, of course (and I guess it would
be feasible to split them into three, four or even more speciﬁc aspects). As
emphasized by Jürgen E. Müller, the aesthetic and the communicative fea-
tures of a medium often arise, or become gradually accepted, or disappear,
at a certain moment in history and in certain socio-cultural circumstances.37
The relativity in many deﬁnitions of particular media is thus strongly related
to the relativity of deﬁning genres and subgenres of media. A genre cannot
be circumscribed as an abstract entity without considering how both ‘form’
and ‘content’ are related to both aesthetic and social changes and sometimes
it is an open question whether a new aesthetic or communicative practice
should be called a medium or a genre.38
The two qualifying aspects thus cannot be left out when trying to
delineate the contours of a medium. A painting consists of paint on a two-
dimensional (or weakly three-dimensional) surface that can be seen (and
to a lesser degree felt and smelled). Generally, the iconic signs dominate.
The iconic signs, together with conventions for representation, very often
make us perceive virtual space in the depiction. In order to be counted as a
painting instead of only paint spread around, however, the picture must be
produced and presented within generally accepted social and artistic frames
and it should have some aesthetic qualities. None of these qualifying aspects
are truly stable, though. Like all art forms and other qualiﬁed media, the
nature of ‘painting’ can only be circumscribed ad hoc. The modalities of the
shifting notions of painting are rather stable, however, and provide a useable
starting point for discussing the limits of the medium. If the material surface
of an alleged painting is strongly three-dimensional, it can consequently be
argued straightforwardly, on the basis of conventional genre and media bor-
ders, that it in fact should be seen as a sculpture due to its material modality.
Of course, this ‘redeﬁnition’ leaning on modality properties may have an
impact on the way the painting or sculpture is conceived when taking into
account the qualifying aspects of media deﬁnitions.


── PAGE 19 ──
PROOF
Lars Elleström
27
All of the four modalities, and as a rule also the two qualifying aspects,
must hence be considered when attempting to ﬁnd the core of one medium
or another – if there is one. However, I think there is a lot to gain in acknowl-
edging not only the existence of modalities and qualifying aspects but also
their different natures. There is no point in comparing different media if the
media in question are described or deﬁned on the basis of only a selection of
modalities and qualifying aspects that are not properly related to each other.
There is a point in deﬁning ‘music’ as a medium since it can be delimited
rather unambiguously by way of the four modalities and the two qualifying
aspects, notwithstanding the open character of the aesthetic qualities. ‘Liter-
ature’ and ‘alphabetic text’ are not media as such though, I would say, since
there is a distinct and extensive modal difference between the material, sen-
sorial and spatiotemporal modalities of visual text and auditory text. ‘Visual
text’ and ‘visual literature’ (based on printed or otherwise inscribed signs),
however, might be seen as media, since they are both categories that include
fairly similar medial objects (if ‘visual text’ is understood to be a written
sequence of linguistic signs on a spatial surface). On the other hand, there
is a difference between the media ‘visual text’ and ‘visual literature’: visual
literature is heavily dependent on the two qualifying aspects while visual
text is a sort of medium that can largely be deﬁned by way of only the four
modalities. Media that are mainly identiﬁed by their modal appearances I
propose to call basic media. Art forms and other cultural media types always
rely strongly on the two qualifying aspects and hence can be called qualiﬁed
media.
The distinction between basic media and qualiﬁed media is not absolute
and, since the modes of the modalities are not easily isolated entities, there
is no deﬁnite set of basic media, I think. However, if we deﬁne ‘text’ as
any conventional sign-system, media such as ‘auditory text’, ‘tactile text’,
‘still image’, ‘moving image’, ‘iconic body performance’ and ‘organized non-
verbal sound’ would be examples of what can be seen as basic media. ‘Visual
text’, however, should be seen as a cluster of basic media that differ depend-
ing on whether they are produced by material signs or body movements,
whether they are ﬁxed in space or inscribed in a temporal ﬂow and per-
haps also whether they consist of singular sign units or sequences of signs.39
Apart from being deﬁned by the two qualifying aspects, qualiﬁed media can
consist of both single basic media, for instance documentary photography
being based on still images, and combinations of basic media, for instance
motion pictures being primarily based on moving images, auditory text and
non-verbal sounds.
What is intermediality?
It has been argued, for good reason, that intermediality is a result of
constructed media borders being trespassed; indeed, there are no media


── PAGE 20 ──
PROOF
28
Media, Modalities and Modes
borders given by nature, but we need borders to talk about intermediality.
Werner Wolf emphasizes that media borders are created by conventions and
Christina Ljungberg stresses the performative aspect of border crossings.40
Intermediality would thus be something that sometimes ‘happens’; an effect
of unconventional ways of performing medial works.
Media borders are of at least two kinds, however: media differ partly
because of modal dissimilarities and partly because of divergences concern-
ing the qualifying aspects of media and the conventionality of media borders
is mainly a facet of the qualifying aspects.41 Intermedial relations between
basic media such as ‘moving image’ and ‘still image’ can thus be relatively
clearly described within the framework of the four modalities, whereas inter-
medial relations between qualiﬁed media such as ‘auditory literature’ and
‘music’ to a great extent also rely on the two qualifying aspects. In the
ﬁrst case, the border between the two basic media of ‘moving image’ and
‘still image’ is mainly to be found in the spatiotemporal modality, since still
images are spatial whereas moving images are both spatial and temporal.
In the second case, the border between ‘auditory literature’ and ‘music’ is
partly of a modal character, considering that all literature is primarily (but
not exclusively) symbolic and music is primarily (but not exclusively) iconic,
and partly of a qualiﬁed character, since the boundaries between what is
counted as literature and music are also largely dependent on cultural and
aesthetic conventions. A ‘normal’ reading of a poem is generally seen as lit-
erature, whereas a singing performance of the same poem counts as music –
and there are many performance variants in between the literary and the
musical that cannot be classiﬁed as either literature or music in a clear-cut
way since there is no deﬁnite border to be crossed. Sometimes it is rather a
question of whether the poem is being performed in a ‘poetry reading’ or
a ‘concert’. This cultural and aesthetic ambiguity of the difference between
auditory literature and music is clearly linked to the semiotic modality, how-
ever. Also, a rather neutral reading of a poem has some iconic potential, and
what is taken to be the increasing ‘musicality’ of a more varied, rhythmic
and melodic reading is in fact strongly linked to an increase of the iconic
sign function.
Both kinds of media borders, the modal and the qualiﬁed, can be crossed
in two rather dissimilar ways. I think it is appropriate to distinguish between,
on the one hand, combination and integration of (basic or qualiﬁed) media
and, on the other hand, mediation and transformation of (basic or quali-
ﬁed) media.42 Theatre, for instance, normally combines and integrates, to
varying degrees, basic media such as auditory text, still image and body per-
formance. The aesthetic aspects of these combinations and integrations of
basic media are part of how theatre is understood and deﬁned as a qual-
iﬁed medium. Each basic medium has its own modal characteristics and
when combined and integrated according to certain qualitative conventions
the result is what we call ‘theatre’, consisting of different kinds of material


── PAGE 21 ──
PROOF
Lars Elleström
29
interfaces, appealing to both the eye and the ear, being both profoundly
spatial and temporal, producing meaning by way of all kinds of signs and,
certainly, being circumscribed by way of historical and cultural conventions
and aesthetic standards. Theatre may thus be said to be a qualiﬁed medium
that is very much multimodal and also, in a way, very much intermedial
since it combines and integrates a range of basic and qualiﬁed media.43 The
pop song, to take another example, is a qualiﬁed medium that includes
the two basic media ‘auditory text’ and ‘organized non-verbal sound’. The
consequences of the combination and integration of these two basic media
are not as far-reaching as the combination of several basic media in the-
atre. Auditory text and organized non-verbal sound have the same material
interface: sound waves that are taken in by the organs of hearing. Their
way of being fundamentally temporal, but also to a certain degree spatial,
is similar. The difference between auditory text and organized non-verbal
sound is clearly to be found in the semiotic modality: the process of sig-
niﬁcation in auditory texts is mainly a question of decoding conventional
signs, whereas the meaning of the organized non-verbal sound ﬁrst and
foremost is a result of interpreting the sounds in terms of resemblance and
contiguity.
An unqualiﬁed combination and integration of these two basic media is
not enough to produce a pop song, however. Normally, both the auditory
text and the non-verbal sound need to have certain qualities that confer on
them not only the value of ‘lyrics’ and ‘music’ but also of ‘pop lyrics’ and
‘pop music’. The qualities of qualiﬁed media become even more qualiﬁed,
so to speak, when aspects of genre are involved; a genre might therefore be
called a sub-medium. Indeed, we usually deem that the lyrics produced by
the singer are in themselves music, as is the sound produced by the mechan-
ical and electronic instruments. The integration of the two basic media in a
pop song is consequently in effect very deep, since the two media are more
or less identical when it comes to three of the four modalities, and concern-
ing the fourth modality, the semiotic, it is perfectly normal to integrate the
symbolic and the iconic sign-processes in the interpretation of both litera-
ture and music. Texts are generally more symbolic and music is generally
more iconic, but the combination and integration of words and music stim-
ulates the interpreter to ﬁnd iconic aspects in the text and to realize the
conventional facets of the music.
Whether it is relevant to talk about the combination and integration of
media is thus a question of degree: media that share no or few modes,
such as music and visual literature, can only be combined or weakly inte-
grated,44 whereas media that have many modes in common may be deeply
integrated. In fact, one may certainly say that media consisting of many dif-
ferent modes in a way are ‘integrated’ or even ‘mixed’ already as ‘isolated’
media, as Mitchell emphasizes.45 However, it is imperative to note that every
medium is modally ‘mixed’ in a way that is more or less unique, allowing


── PAGE 22 ──
PROOF
30
Media, Modalities and Modes
different kinds of intermedial mixtures with other media consisting of
dissimilar modal combinations.46
Similarly, whether it is reasonable to talk about the mediation or transfor-
mation of media is a question of grade. In order to understand this properly,
the notion of technical medium, which has already been used tentatively,
must be discussed further. I deﬁne a technical medium as any object, physi-
cal phenomenon or body that mediates, in the sense that it ‘realizes’ and
‘displays’ basic and qualiﬁed media.47 In this sense, paper is a technical
medium since it can mediate written words, whereas a pen, which can only
produce and not display written words, is not a technical medium. A gui-
tar, however, which can both produce and at the same time realize musical
sound, can also be said to be a technical medium if one considers espe-
cially its sound-realizing aspects.48 Basic and qualiﬁed media can exist only
as ideas without technical media. A technical medium can thus be described
as realizing ‘form’ while basic and qualiﬁed media are latent ‘content’. The
crucial connection between the ‘form’ and the ‘content’ of media is found in
the relation between the technical medium and the material modality: the
material modality of a medium consists of a latent corporeal interface that
can be realized in actual manifestations by technical media.
Like all form–content relations, the relation between technical media and
the material modality is very tight: the theoretical distinction can and must
be made, but in practice the two cannot be separated. For instance, the mate-
rial modality of sculpture consists of (an idea of) extended, generally solid
materiality that can be realized by technical media such as bronze, stone or
plaster. As an abstract notion, sculpture is not connected to speciﬁc technical
media. Actual sculptures, however, are always necessarily realized by particu-
lar technical media, for instance, metal or plastics. Accordingly, when talking
about media, many aspects are involved: ‘a medium’ may mean both a basic
or qualiﬁed medium with latent qualities and a particular realization of a
basic or qualiﬁed medium in a speciﬁc technical medium. We generally say
that both ‘sculpture’ and ‘a sculpture’ are media, although it would perhaps
be more lucid to say that the latter is an instance of a medium or a ‘medial
conﬁguration’ in the phrasing of Irina Rajewsky.49 Hence, intermediality is
both about abstract relations between basic and qualiﬁed media and about
connections between and features of speciﬁc works, performances and media
products.
Every technical medium can be identiﬁed according to the range of basic
media it has the capacity of mediating: that is, which modal variants of
the four modalities it can mediate. The deﬁning features of a technical
medium are its capacity to realize speciﬁc material interfaces and the per-
ceiver’s capacity to interact with these interfaces and with other users of the
medium, whereas the more or less hidden technical properties of the tech-
nical medium (the means of production and storage in a wide sense) are
of subordinate interest as far as this proposed conception is concerned.50


── PAGE 23 ──
PROOF
Lars Elleström
31
Mass media should be understood as a kind of technical media that have
the capacity of permitting, say, ‘simultaneous participation of many people
in some signiﬁcant pattern of their own corporate lives’, as McLuhan sug-
gests.51 The television set is an illuminating case in point: it is a technical
medium able to mediate a range of basic media, primarily ‘moving images’,
‘auditory texts’ and ‘organized non-verbal sound’, but also ‘still images’ and
various sorts of ‘visual texts’. There is a decisive difference between televi-
sion screens being able to transmit images in colour or in black-and-white
only, since the latter sort limits the range of potential interfaces. In con-
trast, the procedural difference between analogue and digital technologies
has no importance in itself when focusing on how the senses meet the
material impact. The computer, another technical medium, can mediate the
same basic media as the television set. Furthermore, it provides the opportu-
nity to interact with the material interfaces and to communicate with other
computer users. The orchestra is a technical medium that realizes ‘organized
non-verbal sound’. The singer is a technical medium, being able to mediate
both ‘auditory texts’ and ‘organized non-verbal sound’, and certainly also
‘body performance’. Stereo equipment is a rather ‘pure’ technical medium
that mediates, without having the capacity to produce, ‘auditory texts’ and
‘organized non-verbal sound’. Some technical media combine the human
and the non-bodily materiality: a man playing a Jew’s harp might be seen as
a cyborg able to mediate unusual fusions of ‘auditory texts’ and ‘organized
non-verbal sound’.
Every technical medium, accordingly, can fully mediate certain basic and
qualiﬁed media but only partly mediate other media. Basic and qualiﬁed
media can hence be mediated more or less completely and successfully by
different technical media. A theatre performance can only be realized by
a combination of technical media such as, for instance, human bodies, an
orchestra and properties. A television set, which mediates a feature ﬁlm very
well (except for the size of the screen), is only capable of partly mediating a
theatre performance: the complex corporeal interface of the theatre appeal-
ing to many senses is reduced to a ﬂat screen and a concentrated source
of sounds and the true visual three-dimensional spatiality is transformed
to virtual spatiality. A solo dance is mediated quite well by a television set,
not very well by still photographs and only in a radically altered form by
a radio – all depending on the shifting modal capacities of the technical
media. Of course, qualiﬁed media can be mediated many times by a row of
technical media, which might be called remediation.52
Some terms, we must remember, hover in a slightly confusing way
between denoting technical and qualiﬁed media. We have already noted
that ‘cinema’ did not become cinema in a qualiﬁed way the day the technol-
ogy was invented. The term ‘photography’, which I recently used to denote
rather vaguely a technical medium, is also the name of a qualiﬁed medium
which has in fact been mediated by various technical media through history.


── PAGE 24 ──
PROOF
32
Media, Modalities and Modes
Cameras are technical devices of production (with the capacity to register
light chemically or physically) which can be said to be attached, more or
less distantly, to technical media with shifting properties, for instance, silver-
plated sheet copper, photographic paper or a screen (a computer screen or a
display on the camera itself).
Certain technical media can mediate basic or qualiﬁed media that may
represent other technical media, which is the case, for instance, when we
see a book or a dancing body on the television screen, but I would not
say that a technical medium as such can be mediated by another technical
medium. The technical medium of a body can be represented on the tele-
vision screen, but it is rather the qualiﬁed medium of dance that is being
mediated. Similarly, seeing a representation of a book on the screen has
very little in common with interacting with a real book since the techni-
cal medium book is not mediated. However, the basic media that a book can
mediate – certain visual texts and still images – can also be mediated very
well by the television screen. Seeing parts of a book in a television program
may thus be described as seeing a representation of the technical medium
‘book’ mediating certain basic media which are actually also being mediated
by the technical medium ‘television set’. To put it more straightforwardly,
the technical medium ‘television set’ mediates the qualiﬁed medium ‘tele-
vision program’ that represents the technical medium ‘book’ that mediates
the basic medium (visual, verbal, static) ‘text’. If one brackets a few links in
the chain one can also say, correctly, that the technical medium ‘television
set’ mediates the basic medium (visual, verbal, static) ‘text’.
It is thus important to realize that mediation and representation are
closely associated and yet distinct. Mediation is a relation between tech-
nical media and basic or qualiﬁed media whereas representation (in this
context) is a relation between basic or qualiﬁed media and what they sig-
nify (which may be almost anything, including technical media and other
qualiﬁed media). The issue of representation thus belongs to the semiotic
modality, which is only one of the many aspects of media and mediation.
Sometimes, however, when the process of mediation is very smooth; that is,
when the material, the sensorial and the spatiotemporal modalities do not
cause any friction in the mediating procedure, representation and mediation
seem to come very close: a photograph of a landscape painting is deﬁnitely
a question of mediation and when asked what the photograph represents
one is inclined to say ‘a landscape’ whereas it actually represents ‘a paint-
ing’: the photograph mediates a painting that represents a landscape. To
be even more detailed: the technical photographic medium, for instance,
photographic paper, mediates the qualiﬁed medium of photography that
represents the technical medium of a coloured surface that mediates the
qualiﬁed medium of, say, oil painting that represents a landscape. No doubt
it is easier, and often sufﬁcient, to simply say that the photographic image


── PAGE 25 ──
PROOF
Lars Elleström
33
represents a landscape, but when wrestling with intermedial issues there are
no short cuts!53
The relation between technical media and basic media is thus a ques-
tion of technical media being able or not being able to mediate certain
modes of the modalities. Consequently, an important facet of the relation
between technical media and qualiﬁed media is about technical media also
being ﬁt to realize the qualifying aspect of aesthetic and communicative
characteristics. As I stated earlier, all qualiﬁed media are characterized by
their origin, delimitation and use in speciﬁc historical, cultural and social
circumstances (the contextual qualifying aspect). Since the existence of spe-
ciﬁc technical media is an essential facet of every historical moment and
cultural space, all qualiﬁed media (qualiﬁed ideas of mediality) are more or
less strongly determined by speciﬁc technical media (realizations of medial-
ity). Some qualiﬁed media are actually fundamentally linked to irreplaceable
technical media. Hence, technical media inevitably also play a crucial part
in the forming of the characteristic aesthetic and communicative qualities
of qualiﬁed media (the operational qualifying aspect). Oil painting can be
described as a qualiﬁed medium characterized not only by certain modes
but also by unique aesthetic qualities linked to the technical medium of oil
colour, which was invented and developed at a certain time and in a certain
cultural context. Similarly, qualiﬁed media types such as computer games
are inconceivable without the resource of recently invented technical media
that allow advanced interaction with the displayed interface.
When the mediation of basic and qualiﬁed media through technical media
is restricted by the modal capacities of the technical media, or when the tech-
nical media allow of modal expansion, that is, when the mediation brings
about more or less radical modal changes, it may rather be described as trans-
formation. A solo dance being mediated by a radio is drastically transformed
by the mediation. I can think of two ways to perform such mediation: either
the dance is transformed to auditory text or to organized non-verbal sound.
In both cases, the human body of the dancer, which is normally consid-
ered to be a vital part of dance, is substituted by sound waves and the visual
mode is substituted by the auditory mode. In the case of a dance being trans-
formed to an auditory text, the spatiotemporal furthermore is reduced to a
primarily temporal mode, and, perhaps most importantly, the iconic mode
is transformed to a symbolic mode.
The qualiﬁed medium photography being mediated by a book is another
example of potentially radical mediation. Again, I can think of at least
two ways of mediating photography by way of the technical medium of
a book. If reproduced as an image, the book is an ideal technical medium
for mediating a photograph, and certainly other still images as well, present-
ing virtually no modal limitations at all compared with how photography
is usually presented. In fact, the book must be seen as one of the technical


── PAGE 26 ──
PROOF
34
Media, Modalities and Modes
media that originally determined the qualifying aspects of photography. If
mediated as a verbal description, however, the book offers the possibility
of a smooth mediation of visual texts. However, the visual text is in itself
a radical transformation of the photography: the two-dimensional spatiality
(involving virtual depth) of the primarily iconic and indexical still image has
been transformed to two-dimensional spatiality that, because of the mainly
symbolic character of the visual text, also involves the temporal aspect of
ﬁxed sequentiality.
It is hence not necessarily the technical medium that ‘forces’ the transfor-
mation. Ekphrasis, for instance, is part of the general habit of transforming
basic and qualiﬁed media to other basic and qualiﬁed media, which is some-
times a result of the modal constraints of technical media (as when a football
match is covered on the radio) and sometimes a result of aesthetic or com-
municative choices to take advantage of modal possibilities (as when a
verbal narrative is transformed to a symphonic poem or when a movie is
transformed to a computer game). The classical ekphrasis, a poem describ-
ing a painting, is characterized by a certain kind of medial transformation:
the factual space and the virtual time of the painting’s visual iconicity are
being transformed to the virtual space of the poem’s sequentially arranged
symbolic signs.54
Obviously, there are very many kinds of intermedial transformations.55
Sometimes these involve fairly clear and complete relations between speciﬁc
art works or media productions, as when a particular newspaper article is
clearly recognizable in its Internet version (although with fewer words and
added animations and hyperlinks) or when a speciﬁc novel can be identiﬁed
as the source of a movie (although the narrative has been abridged and visual
and iconic qualities have been added). Sometimes it is rather a question of
less deﬁnitive and fragmentary media traits that travel between modes and
media types, as when musical form is traced in a short story or when visual
traits associated with comic strips can be said to have found their way to the
moving images of motion pictures.
In her book Intermedialität, Irina O. Rajewsky operates, on different levels
of distinction, with three notions that I ﬁnd relevant when discussing media
transformation: transmediality (Transmedialität, phenomena that are not
media speciﬁc, such as parody), medial transposition (Medienwechsel, media
transformations such as adaptation) and intermedial references (intermediale
Bezüge, for instance narrativization of music or musicalization of ﬁction).56
These distinctions are valuable as long as one does not force them. In prac-
tice, however, it is not always clear when a medium is actually a distinct
transformation of another medium, exactly when some of the indistinct
media borders have been transgressed, or which traits are to be considered as
belonging to the one medium or the other. Intermedial transformations can
only partly be described as a ﬁxed set of media relations. Ultimately, it is a
question of hermeneutics: when ﬁnding traces of another medium, whether


── PAGE 27 ──
PROOF
Lars Elleström
35
it is a basic medium or a speciﬁc qualiﬁed medium, it sometimes makes sense
to say that the initial medium is very much recognizable and that it has been
transformed to the other medium. Sometimes, if the connection seems more
fragile, one might prefer to say that the one medium simply refers to the
other. The only method of deciding whether it is a case of ‘strong’ transfor-
mation or ‘weak’ reference is to interpret. Actually, it even makes sense also
to talk about the transformation of ﬁctive media. There is no fundamental
difference between the descriptions of, for example, an existing photo and
a non-existent photo. At times, the most important issue is not at all to
determine the transformational direction and speciﬁc relation between two
speciﬁc media instances but rather to compare traits, structures and forms
of meaning that are to be found in many qualiﬁed media, within a speciﬁc
historical context or crossing historical and social boundaries, where they
‘circulate’ without being deﬁnitely linked to the one or the other medium.
Such transmedial phenomena are best captured by transmedial notions and
concepts.57
What is the conclusion?
The starting point of this essay was the simple idea that if the notion of
medium is not speciﬁed, the notion of intermediality cannot be understood
properly. Media must be understood to be both similar and different and
the notion of multimodality can be used to describe in a rather strict way
what the many similarities and differences are. There are four modalities
that underlie all conceivable media but each modality encloses several modes
that vary between media. The modes of the modalities are not always easily
detectable properties; rather, they are to be found on a scale from the mate-
rial to the perceptual and the conceptual. Understanding the modal qualities
of media is not a question of simple observation; it also includes cognition
and interpretation.
The model presented for understanding intermedial relations is a bottom-
up model. Instead of beginning with a small selection of established media
and their interrelations, which is the usual method, it starts with the modal-
ities and modes that are shared by all media. The relations between the four
modalities and the modes that are most easy to track down are illustrated in
Figure 1.
Apart from the modalities, two qualifying aspects must be considered in
order to understand the notion of medium. The contextual qualifying aspect
is the origin, delimitation and use of media in speciﬁc historical, cultural
and social circumstances. The operational qualifying aspect is the aesthetic and
communicative characteristics of media. What I propose to call basic media,
are deﬁned by the four modalities whereas qualiﬁed media are deﬁned by the
four modalities and the two qualifying aspects. All qualiﬁed media are based
on one or more basic media.


── PAGE 28 ──
PROOF
36
Media, Modalities and Modes
Modality
What the modality is
The most important modes of the
modality
Material modality
The latent corporeal interface of
the medium; where the senses
meet the material impact
□
human bodies
□
other demarcated materiality
□
not demarcated materiality
Sensorial modality
The physical and mental acts of
perceiving the interface of the
medium through the sense
faculties
□
seeing
□
hearing
□
feeling
□
tasting
□
smelling
Spatiotemporal
modality
The structuring of the sensorial
perception of the material
interface into experiences and
conceptions of space and time
□
space manifested in the
material interface
□
cognitive space (always
present)
□
virtual space
□
time manifested in the material
interface
□
perceptual time (always
present)
□
virtual time
Semiotic modality
The creation of meaning in the
spatiotemporally conceived
medium by way of different sorts
of thinking and sign interpretation
□
convention (symbolic signs)
□
resemblance (iconic signs)
□
contiguity (indexical signs)
Figure 1
The modalities and modes of media
Thus, intermedial relations can be found both between basic media and
between qualiﬁed media. Intermedial relations consequently include both
modal relations and qualiﬁed relations founded on conventions and a range
of historically changing circumstances. Furthermore, intermediality is about
both basic and qualiﬁed media as such and about speciﬁc works and per-
formances. Intermedial relations have been categorized in many intricate
systems but for the purpose of this essay I ﬁnd it sufﬁcient to differenti-
ate between two main types, each holding a variety of merging variants: on
the one hand, combination and integration of media and, on the other hand,
mediation and transformation of media. Depending on their modal charac-
ter and to a certain extent also on their qualifying properties, media can be
both rather loosely combined and intimately integrated. Media consisting of
many modes are in a way ‘integrated’ in themselves.
Basic and qualiﬁed media must be understood as abstractions that need
technical media to be materially realized. The material modality is the latent
corporeal interface of a media type that can be realized in actual manifes-
tations by technical media. The relation between technical media and basic
media is consequently very much a question of technical media being able


── PAGE 29 ──
PROOF
Lars Elleström
37
to or not being able to mediate certain modes, and all technical media must
be deﬁned in relation to the range of basic media they have the capacity of
mediating. When mediation involves more or less radical modal changes, it
is feasible to say that it involves transformation.
Doubtless, there are other kinds of intermedial relations that have not
found their way into my model but might be compatible with it. For
instance, the relations between various technical media, regardless of their
mediated ‘content’, may well be described partly in terms of modal differ-
ences. Needless to say, the many abstract examples of media characteristics
and intermedial relations that I have brieﬂy discussed have forced some
rather brusque simpliﬁcations, but my point has been not so much to exactly
circumscribe certain media characteristics and speciﬁc intermedial relations
as to provide a model and a rudimental method for such business.
What is a medium? The confusion around this question, and the incom-
patibility of many of the suggested answers, is largely caused, I think, by the
shifting approaches of different scholars and research traditions. Technical
aspects as well as modal and qualifying aspects have been emphasized in
diverse and often exclusive ways in the efforts to ﬁnd narrow and hence
efﬁciently operable deﬁnitions of the notion of medium.58 One alterna-
tive has been to lean on conceptions of media that are open-ended and
mind-triggering but difﬁcult to handle in the context of intermediality. The
advantage of rather seeing a medium as a complex of interrelated facets –
the technical, the modal and the qualifying aspects – is that such a notion
sets certain limits while at the same time it incorporates most of the actual
comprehensions of mediality.
What is multimodality? To say that a medium is multimodal if it com-
bines, for instance, solid materiality, visuality, spatiality and iconicity, is a
truism since there simply are no media that are not being realized by at least
one mode of each modality. Multimodality in a more qualiﬁed sense must
hence mean that a medium includes many modes within the same modality.
However, all media are at least slightly multimodal as far as the spatiotem-
poral and the semiotic modalities are concerned, whereas some media are
multimodal on the level of all four modalities. It can thus be argued that
multimodality is very much about really observing and emphasizing the
very common and perfectly normal multimodal characteristics of media.
Certainly, multimodality is a very general phenomenon that may also be
studied outside the context of media.
What is then intermediality? The many possible intermedial relations
within and between media have been discussed in some detail so far and
it has become clear, I think, that intermediality is a notion that cannot
be understood without the notions of modality, mode and multimodal-
ity. Intermediality might be described as ‘intermodal relations in media’ or
‘media intermultimodality’. I do not expect these terrible terms to win gen-
eral praise but I think there is a point in seeing intermediality as a complex
set of relations between media that are always more or less multimodal.


── PAGE 30 ──
PROOF
38
Media, Modalities and Modes
I have hesitated to describe certain kinds of media as intermedial ‘in
themselves’. Many media, if not all, are indeed multimodal ‘in themselves’,
but when also considering the qualifying aspects of media, things become
more complex. Media characterized by strong multimodality may be said to
be intermedial in themselves in the sense that certain modal ‘borders’ are
crossed. However, theatre and computer games, two examples of strongly
multimodal media, are conventionally understood and rather well deﬁned as
qualiﬁed media, so in that sense they are coherent media rather than exam-
ples of pronounced intermedial crossings of conventional borders, although
they may be said to fuse a multitude of qualiﬁed media that also exist in their
own right: music, for instance. It is thus necessary to acknowledge that qual-
iﬁed media are conventionally circumscribed, but one must also realize that
the circumscriptions of qualiﬁed media in themselves create complex net-
works of conventional media borders. All qualiﬁed media overlap, and some
conventional media are totally engulfed by other conventional media. Con-
sequently, one is actually not much helped by the notion that intermediality
is the crossing of conventional media borders.
The point is that both multimodality and intermediality are to be found
everywhere. One can thus say that everything is intermedial and multimodal,
which is deﬁnitely true in a way, but that might come dangerously close to
saying that nothing is intermedial or multimodal. Given the fact that quali-
ﬁed media are changing entities, I still ﬁnd it most proﬁtable to hold on to
the idea that all ‘mediality’ involve ‘intermediality’. I do not believe that it
is necessary or even possible to circumscribe a speciﬁc corpus of intermedial
works or a set of ﬁxed relations between media, although I ﬁnd many of the
scholarly systems of intermedial ‘works’ and ‘relations’ very valuable.59 Of
course, it is essential to discuss which media, and which relations between
media, might be of speciﬁc intermedial relevance, but I think it is pointless
to try to establish clear borders – they are bound to be crossed. Who would,
today, dream of deciding the exact delimitations of ‘art’ or even ‘visual art’ in
order to ﬁx the area of investigation for art historians? Who would want the
objects of ‘popular culture’ to be narrowly deﬁned in order to select suitable
objects for, say, cultural studies to interpret? The nature of intermedial rela-
tions, as they have been described here, is thus only seemingly exact and one
must realize that they can be pinned down only to a certain extent. Interme-
dial analysis cannot live without her twin sister intermedial interpretation.
Intermediality is thus certainly about speciﬁc intermedial relations but it is
also, and perhaps primarily, I would say, about studying all kinds of media
with a high level of awareness of the modalities of media and the crucial
modal differences and similarities of media. What makes intermedial studies
important is that they offer insights into the medial nature of all media, not
only a selection of peripheral media.60 The objects of intermedial studies may
well be, for instance, media that have been categorized as ‘intermedial’ in
themselves but they may also be what have been taken to be ‘normal’ media.


── PAGE 31 ──
PROOF
Lars Elleström
39
The outcome of the studies does not so much depend on the objects of study
as on the way the studies are performed. Some studies of pattern poems or
newspapers may totally lack intermedial relevance, whereas other studies of
written prose texts or photographs may be bursting with intermedial aspects.
Notes
1. G. E. Lessing (1984) Laokoön: An Essay on the Limits of Painting and Poetry, trans-
lated, with an introduction and notes, by E. A. McCormick (Baltimore MD and
London: Johns Hopkins University Press). Lessing states that the poet can treat
‘two kinds of beings and actions, visible and invisible’, whereas in painting ‘every-
thing is visible’ (pp. 66, 76). It is certainly questionable to propose that painting
cannot deal with the ‘invisible’, but what is by far the most important for Lessing
is to be normative rather than descriptive: the good poet should not deal with
the visible unless it is inscribed in time in the form of action, whereas the good
painter should not deal with action at all, but only with visible objects that are
not inscribed in time. Actually, he once states that ‘signs existing in space can
express only objects whose wholes or parts coexist, while signs that follow one
another can express only objects whose wholes or parts are consecutive’, which
sounds very deﬁnite, but his conclusion deals with the ‘true subjects’ of poetry
and painting (p. 78) and in the rest of the essay he constantly refers to examples
of, for instance, poetry describing static objects, which is of course fully possi-
ble but not, according to Lessing, recommendable (p. 85). A philosopher such as
Susanne K. Langer is much more consistent when it comes to upholding tenable
borders between the arts. See S. K. Langer (1957) ‘Deceptive Analogies: Specious
and Real Relationships among the Arts’, Problems of Art: Ten Philosophical Lectures
(New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons), pp. 75–89.
2. Cf., for instance, Jörg Helbig’s recent taxonomy of intra, inter, trans and mul-
timedial relations in J. Helbig (2008) ‘Intermedialität – eine speziﬁsche Form
des Medienkontakts oder globaler Oberbegriff? Neue Überlegungen zur System-
atik intersemiotischer Beziehungen’ in J. E. Müller (ed.) Media Encounters and
Media Theories (Münster: Nodus Publikationen). It works quite well as a very
rough model and it is representative of the interart tradition where the media
are very much seen as more or less separate entities. Its value is nevertheless
severely reduced because of the idea that media can be understood as ‘distinct
sign systems’ (p. 83) with ﬁxed ‘medial borders’ (p. 79), each medium having its
‘medial surface’ (p. 85). Cf. also Axel Englund’s critical discussion, in this volume,
of ‘topographic’ ways of deﬁning and delimiting media.
3. See the very comprehensive overview of the development of the research ﬁeld
intermedial studies in C. Clüver (2007) ‘Intermediality and Interarts Studies’ in
J. Arvidson, M. Askander, J. Bruhn and H. Führer (eds) Changing Borders: Con-
temporary Positions in Intermediality (Lund: Intermedia Studies Press), pp. 19–37.
Also Irina Rajewsky’s overview of the ﬁeld, from the point of view of comparative
literature and media studies, is valuable: I. O. Rajewsky (2008) ‘Intermedialität
und remediation: Überlegungen zu einigen Problemfeldern der jüngeren Interme-
dialitätsforschung’ in J. Paech and J. Schröter (eds) Intermedialität Analog/Digital:
Theorien – Methoden – Analysen (Munich: Wilhelm Fink), pp. 47–60. Many of the
studies of ‘intermediality’ are, in fact, considering both the theoretical frame-
works and the objects of research, rather studies of ‘interartiality’, for instance


── PAGE 32 ──
PROOF
40
Media, Modalities and Modes
T. Eichner and U. Bleckmann (eds) (1994) Intermedialität: Vom Bild zum Text (Biele-
feld: Aisthesis Verlag) and W. Wolf (1999) The Musicalization of Fiction: A Study in
the Theory and History of Intermediality (Amsterdam and Atlanta, GA: Rodopi).
4. Mikko Lehtonen, however, arguing eloquently for the introduction of the per-
spective of intermediality in cultural studies, has published an essay in a journal
of media and communication studies where the notions of multimodality and
intermediality are combined: M. Lehtonen (2001) ‘On No Man’s Land: Theses
on Intermediality’, Nordicom Review 22, 71–83. Lehtonen is not aware of the
research tradition of intermediality described by Clüver and hence he more or
less has to invent the topic. Although he uses the notions in a different way from
that proposed in this essay, the relation between multimodality and interme-
diality is accurately described: ‘multimodality always characterizes one medium
at a time. Intermediality, again, is about the relationships between multimodal
media’ (p. 75). Lehtonen is not the only one who has invented intermedi-
ality anew. See, for instance, L. M. Semali and A. W. Pailliotet (eds) (1999)
Intermediality: The Teachers’ Handbook of Critical Media Literacy (Boulder CO and
Oxford: Westview Press), where media literacy is discussed in terms of interme-
diality without knowledge of the existing research ﬁelds of intermediality and
multimodality.
5. See S. Moser (2007) ‘Iconicity in Multimedia Performance: Laurie Anderson’s
White Lily’ in E. Tabakowska, C. Ljungberg and O. Fischer (eds) Insistent Images,
in Iconicity in Language and Literature 5 (Amsterdam: John Benjamins), p. 323.
In another essay, S. Moser (2007) ‘Media Modes of Poetic Reception: Reading
Lyrics Versus Listening to Songs’, Poetics 35, 277–300, the author uses the terms
‘modality’ and ‘mode’ in a perfectly comprehensible but not systematic way:
‘modalities of poetic language (print/song) and corresponding modes of recep-
tion (reading/listening)’ (p. 277); ‘Songs are a multisensorial mode of linguistic
communication’ (p. 278); ‘lyrics occur in different media modalities, namely
oral ... printed ... and audiovisual’ (p. 278) and so forth. The ‘intermedia prac-
tice’ of popular songs is said to enact and embody ‘the interplay and integration of
oral, literate and audiovisual modes of linguistic communication’ (p. 283).
6. M. McLuhan (1994) Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man, Introduction by
Lewis H. Lapham (Cambridge MA and London: MIT Press), p. 24.
7. Cf. B. Granström, D. House and I. Karlsson (eds) (2002) Multimodality in Language
and Speech Systems (Dordrecht, Boston MA and London: Kluwer Academic Pub-
lishers). In the ‘Introduction’ by the editors, it is stated that multimodality is, in
essence, ‘the use of two or more of the ﬁve senses for the exchange of informa-
tion’ (p. 1). In many of the essays in the same volume, however, modalities are
also understood as gesture, speech, writing and so forth. In one of them, N. O.
Bernsen (2002) ‘Multimodality in Language and Speech Systems: From Theory
to Design Support Tool’, a medium is circumscribed as ‘the physical realisation of
some presentation of information at the interface between human and system’,
meaning in effect that media are deﬁned by the ‘sensory modalities’ (p. 94).
8. G. Kress and T. van Leeuwen (2001) Multimodal Discourse: The Modes and Media of
Contemporary Communication (London: Hodder Arnold), pp. vii, 3, 20, 22, 25, 28,
67, 80; G. Kress and T. van Leeuwen (2006) Reading Images: The Grammar of Visual
Design, 2nd edn (London and New York: Routledge), pp. 46, 113, 177, 214. In
spite of claims of systematic analysis, the fundamental notion of multimodality
is still circumscribed rather haphazardly by researchers following Kress and van
Leeuwen, for instance J. A. Bateman (2008) Multimodality and Genre: A Foundation


── PAGE 33 ──
PROOF
Lars Elleström
41
for the Systemic Analysis of Multimodal Documents (Basingstoke and New York:
Palgrave Macmillan), who takes modes such as text, image, diagram, the visual,
the spatial and the verbal to contribute to multimodality (pp. 1, 7), although
these overlapping modes are never clearly related to each other as far as semiotic,
sensorial or spatiotemporal aspects are concerned.
9. In W. J. T. Mitchell (1986) Iconology: Image, Text, Ideology (Chicago and London:
University of Chicago Press), his fundamental and very traditional dichotomies
are text/image, verbal/pictorial and poetry/painting. This is understandable in
the light of the historical tradition that he wrestles with, but these dichotomies
must be overcome in order to grasp fully the similarities of media. By way of con-
stantly reinforcing these dichotomies through the ﬁgure of paragone (the ‘battle’
of the arts), which is of course necessary to achieve the historical understanding
of culturally constructed differences between poetry and painting (which seems
to be Mitchell’s most important aim), he thus in a way reinstates the differences
that he simultaneously deconstructs on the ahistorical level. In M. Bal (1991)
Reading Rembrandt: Beyond the Word-Image Opposition (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press), the author convincingly and brilliantly demonstrates that ‘word’
and ‘image’ are interrelated and integrated in complex ways, but she continues
to operate with the dichotomy ‘verbal/visual’ in spite of the modal incommensu-
rability of the two notions (the verbal and the visual are not to be understood as
media-speciﬁc characteristics, though).
10. Cf. the detailed and often enlightening comparison of literature and music in
W. Wolf (1999) The Musicalization of Fiction, and the excellent comparison of
prose ﬁction and ﬁction ﬁlm in C. Johansson (2008) Mimetiskt syskonskap: En
representationsteoretisk undersökning av relationen ﬁktionsprosa-ﬁktionsﬁlm [Mimetic
Sisterhood: A Representation Theoretical Study of the Interrelations of Prose
Fiction and Fiction Film] (Stockholm: Acta Universitatis Stockholmiensis).
11. An important early thinker who saw things more clearly than most was Moses
Mendelssohn. In ‘On the Main Principles of the Fine Arts and Sciences’ [Über die
Hauptgrundsätze der schönen Künste und Wissenschaften, 1757], translated by
D. O. Dahlstrom, in D. O. Dahlstrom (ed.) (1997) Philosophical Writings (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press), Mendelssohn builds a typology with the
aid of distinctions such as ‘natural’ versus ‘arbitrary’ signs, ‘the sense of hear-
ing’ versus ‘the sense of sight’ and signs that are represented ‘successively’ versus
‘alongside one another’ (pp. 177–9). The typology is sketchy but instructive since
Mendelssohn clearly realizes that the borders of the arts ‘often blur into one
another’ (p. 181). In modern times, Wendy Steiner has provided one of the
most nuanced and constructive accounts of many of the problems connected
to the spatiotemporal and semiotic aspects of interart comparison where she
manages to avoid most of the common pitfalls: W. Steiner (1982) The Colors of
Rhetoric: Problems in the Relation between Modern Literature and Painting (Chicago
and London: Chicago University Press). In W. J. T. Mitchell (1987) ‘Going Too
Far with the Sister Arts’ in J. A. W. Heffernan (ed.) Space, Time, Image, Sign: Essays
on Literature and the Visual Arts (New York: Peter Lang), the author discusses ‘four
basic ways in which we theoretically differentiate texts from images’. Three of
these ways are ‘perceptual mode (eye versus ear)’, ‘conceptual mode (space ver-
sus time)’ and ‘semiotic medium (natural versus conventional signs)’. He argues
that ‘there is no essential difference between poetry and painting, no difference,
that is, given for all time by the inherent natures of the media, the objects they
represent or the laws of the human mind’ (pp. 2–3). Mitchell demonstrates very


── PAGE 34 ──
PROOF
42
Media, Modalities and Modes
well that ideological considerations often permeate much of the rhetoric concern-
ing medial differences, and that there are important similarities, but he does not
really suggest that there are no differences. Although it is important not to exag-
gerate the differences between media, I would say that it is fully possible ‘to give
a theoretical account of these differences’ (p. 2), essential or not, which Mitchell
sincerely doubts.
12. J. Veltruský (1981) ‘Comparative Semiotics of Art’ in W. Steiner (ed.) Image and
Code (Ann Arbor: Michigan Studies in the Humanities).
13. Ibid., p. 110.
14. See the enlightening chapter, ‘Philosophical Classiﬁcations of the Arts’ in
T. Munro (1969) The Arts and Their Interrelations, revised and enlarged edi-
tion (Cleveland OH and London: Press of Case Western Reserve University),
pp. 157–208.
15. Living creatures have photosensitive, chemosensitive, mechanosensitive, elec-
trosensitive and thermosensitive receptors. The photoreceptors of human beings
are found in the eyes, while other creatures have them in the skin. Our
chemoreceptors are located in the organs of taste and smell, but also in certain
blood vessels. Mechanoreceptors that register changes of position and pres-
sure are in the organs of balance and hearing, and in the skin we also have
mechanoreceptors that register touch, pressure and vibrations. Similarly, electro
and thermoreceptors are located at various places in the body.
16. These sense organs do not, however, simply consist of ﬁve different kinds of recep-
tors. Both the olfactory and the gustatory organs consist of chemoreceptors, and
the skin consists of both mechanoreceptors and thermoreceptors. Moreover, the
sense organs and the different kinds of receptors do not work in isolation. Strong
sound, for instance, can both be heard and felt by the whole body, although
human beings do not have the very sensitive external sense organ of ﬁshes, the
side line, which registers all kinds of sounds, vibrations and movements in the
ﬁsh’s environment.
17. I. Kant (1997) ‘Prolegomena to any future Metaphysics that will be able to come forward
as Science’, with selections from the ‘Critique of Pure Reason’, translated and edited
by G. Hatﬁeld (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), Prolegomena p. 35, § 10.
Cf. T. Munro (1969) The Arts and Their Interrelations, pp. 362–3, 399–406.
18. The notion of ‘spatial thinking’, inspired by R. Arnheim (1969) Visual Think-
ing (Berkeley and Los Angeles CA: University of California Press) is discussed in
L. Elleström (2002) Divine Madness: On Interpreting Literature, Music, and the Visual
Arts Ironically (Lewisburg PA and London: Bucknell University Press), pp. 184–93,
219–24 and in L. Elleström (forthcoming) ‘Iconicity as Meaning Miming Mean-
ing, and Meaning Miming Form’ in M. Beukes, J. Conradie, O. Fischer and
C. Ljungberg (eds) Signergy, in Iconicity in Language and Literature 7 (Amsterdam:
John Benjamins). For spatiality in music, see R. P. Morgan (1980) ‘Musical
Time/Musical Space’ in W. J. T. Mitchell (ed.) The Language of Images (Chicago
and London: University of Chicago Press), pp. 259–70. For spatiality in literature,
see W. J. T. Mitchell (1980) ‘Spatial Form in Literature: Toward a General Theory’
in the same volume, pp. 281–6. In this inspiring essay, Mitchell clearly sees the
complexities of the spatiotemporal and he is eager to make the important point
that space and time are closely interrelated. However, he makes no distinction
between, for instance, ‘spatial forms’ and the ‘experience’ of spatial forms, which
somewhat reduces the compass of his arguments.


── PAGE 35 ──
PROOF
Lars Elleström
43
19. Cf. J. Frank (1991) ‘Spatial Form in Modern Literature’ [1945] in The Idea of Spa-
tial Form (New Brunswick and London: Rutgers University Press), pp. 5–66. The
notion of virtual worlds has since then been extensively explored within the ﬁeld
of cognitive poetics.
20. See the enlightening discussions in J. A. W. Heffernan (1987) ‘The Temporaliza-
tion of Space in Wordsworth, Turner, and Constable’ in J. A. W. Heffernan (ed.)
Space, Time, Image, Sign: Essays on Literature and the Visual Arts (New York: Peter
Lang), pp. 64–5.
21. Lessing acknowledges that there are represented bodies in painting ‘which, by
their position, permit us to conjecture an action’: G. E. Lessing (1984) Laokoön,
p. 77. He actually clearly states (which seems to be at odds with his earlier
one-sided assertion concerning what ‘signs existing in space can express’) that
‘painting too can imitate actions, but only by suggestion through bodies’ (p. 78).
22. Cf. E. H. Gombrich (1980) ‘Standards of Truth: The Arrested Image and the Mov-
ing Eye’ in W. J. T. Mitchell (ed.) The Language of Images (Chicago and London:
University of Chicago Press), pp. 208–17.
23. Langer uses the term ‘virtual time’ to denote the aspect of time in both music and
the plastic arts: Langer (1957) ‘Deceptive Analogies’, pp. 81–3.
24. Also Wendy Steiner comes to the conclusion that space and time ‘in fact relate
to three very different aspects of the work’ (1982, p. 50). Their aspects are sim-
ilar but not identical to the three levels that I discern. Cf. the detailed and
mostly convincing discussions in J. Levinson and P. Alperson (1991) ‘What
Is a Temporal Art?’ Midwest Studies in Philosophy 16, 439–50. Levinson and
Alperson, too, conclude that there are three main variants of temporality
in arts.
25. For references to relevant research, see Elleström (forthcoming) ‘Iconicity as
Meaning Miming Meaning, and Meaning Miming Form’.
26. C. Hartshorne and P. Weiss (eds) (1960) Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce
Volume II, Elements of Logic (Cambridge MA and London: The Belknap Press of
Harvard University Press), pp. 156–73.
27. Ibid., p. 135.
28. See Elleström (2009) ‘Iconicity as Meaning Miming Meaning, and Meaning Mim-
ing Form’. I am well aware of the lack of consensus, not least when it comes to
the question of meaning in music, but my point is that no matter how you deﬁne
the semiotic character of a qualiﬁed medium it must include semiotic differences
that are at least partly media speciﬁc. Even if one does not accept the notion of
musical iconicity one must admit that there is a fundamental difference between
the way music and, say, literature produce meaning.
29. McLuhan (1994) Understanding Media, pp. 8, 305.
30. ‘all media are mixed media, combining different codes, discursive conventions,
channels, sensory and cognitive modes’: W. J. T. Mitchell (1994) ‘Beyond Com-
parison: Picture, Text, and Method’ in Picture Theory: Essays on Verbal and Visual
Representation (Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press), p. 95; ‘All
media are, from the standpoint of sensory modality, “mixed media” ’ and ‘the
very notion of a medium and of mediation already entails some mixture of sen-
sory, perceptual and semiotic elements’: W. J. T. Mitchell (2005) ‘There Are no
Visual Media’, Journal of Visual Culture 4, pp. 257, 260. Cf. the briefer comments
in W. J. T. Mitchell (2005) What do Pictures Want? The Lives and Loves of Images
(Chicago and London: Chicago University Press), pp. 215, 350.


── PAGE 36 ──
PROOF
44
Media, Modalities and Modes
31. Joseph Garncarz rightly argues that one must see media ‘not only as textual sys-
tems, but as cultural and social institutions’: J. Garncarz (1998) ‘Vom Varieté zum
Kino: Ein Plädoyer für ein erweitertes Konzept der Intermedialität’ in J. Helbig
(ed.) Intermedialität: Theorie und Praxis eines interdisziplinären Forschungsgebiets
(Berlin: Erich Schmidt Verlag), p. 253.
32. I refrain from trying to say exactly what ‘aesthetic and communicative character-
istics’ are. Actually, any understanding of these characteristics is part of the way
the operational qualifying aspect works: all changes in aesthetic conceptions, and
even a denial of the point of thinking in terms of aesthetics, take part of the
forming of qualiﬁed media.
33. Cf. Wolf’s deﬁnition of a medium as ‘a conventionally distinct means of com-
munication, speciﬁed not only by particular channels (or one channel) of
communication but also the use of one or more semiotic systems serving for the
transmission of cultural “messages” ’: Wolf (1999) The Musicalization of Fiction,
pp. 35–6.
34. Lessing (1984) Laokoön, p. 85.
35. See A. Gaudreault and P. Marion (2002) ‘The Cinema as a Model for the Genealogy
of Media’, translated by Timoty Barnard, Convergence 8(4), 12–18. Cf. the case
of video which was ﬁrst launched as a technical medium and then eventually
gave birth to a qualiﬁed medium with speciﬁc aesthetic qualities, as described in
Y. Spielmann (2008) Video: The Reﬂexive Medium, translated by Anja Welle and
Stan Jones (Cambridge MA and London: MIT Press).
36. The terminological problem is aggravated by the shifting use of similar words
in different languages. Hajnal Király has suggested to me that ‘movie’ would be
the closest denomination for the technical aspect and that ‘cinema’ most often
rather refers to the sociological, institutional and cultural, that is the contextual
qualifying aspect, while ‘ﬁlm’ is associated with the aesthetically mature medium,
determined by the operational qualifying aspect.
37. Discussing television, Müller demonstrates how social, cultural and historical
aspects of what I would call the qualiﬁed medium of television interact with
aesthetic and communicative aspects. All these qualifying aspects are developed
well after the step-by-step emergence of the technological prerequisites of the
medium. See J. E. Müller, this volume, and idem (2008) ‘Perspectives for an Inter-
media History of the Social Functions of Television’ in J. E. Müller (ed.) Media
Encounters and Media Theories (Münster: Nodus Publikationen), pp. 201–15. Cf.
also J. E. Müller (2008) ‘Intermedialität und Medienhistoriographie’ in J. Paech
and J. Schröter (eds) Intermedialität Analog/Digital: Theorien – Methoden – Analysen
(Munich: Wilhelm Fink), pp. 31–46.
38. Cf. the genre discussion in Rajewsky, this volume.
39. If we were to assume, in a very simpliﬁed way, that the most important modes
could be isolated, say (human bodies, other demarcated materiality and not
demarcated materiality), (seeing, hearing and feeling), (space and time) and (sym-
bols, icons and indices), and that these modes could be mixed following the
principle that there must be at least one mode per modality, and that there
can also be all sorts of combinations of modes within the same modality, the
possible amount of combinations would be 7×7×3×7=1029. Needless to say, it
would be ridiculous to speak of 1029, or more, types of basic media. We have
to settle with the fact that some basic modal combinations are commonly dis-
tinguishable at a certain time and that the future may hold new conventions
and technical solutions that make novel basic media discernible, such as a basic


── PAGE 37 ──
PROOF
Lars Elleström
45
medium consisting of, say, not demarcated materiality that can be both seen
and felt, that is perceived as both a spatial extension and a temporal ﬂow pro-
ducing mainly iconic meaning. Assuming that a technical medium capable of
mediating such a basic medium were invented, one may expect that a range of
qualiﬁed media soon would be developed forming aesthetic and communicative
conventions and eventually giving rise to more or less demarcated genres and
subgenres.
40. ‘ “Intermediality” can therefore be deﬁned as a particular relation (a relation that
is “intermedial” in the narrow sense) between conventionally distinct media of
expression or communication’: Wolf (1999) The Musicalization of Fiction, p. 37.
See also C. Ljungberg, this volume.
41. A similar conclusion is drawn by Irina Rajewsky in her essay in this volume.
42. Cf. Hans Lund’s heuristic distinction between three kinds of word–picture rela-
tions: combination, integration and transformation, in H. Lund (1992) Text as
Picture: Studies in the Literary Transformation of Pictures, translated by Kacke Götrick
(Lewiston NY, Queenston Ontario and Lampeter UK: Edwin Mellen Press), pp.
5–9. Instead of combination and integration, Claus Clüver distinguishes between
multimedia texts (separable texts), mixed-media texts (weakly integrated texts)
and intermedia texts (fully integrated texts): Clüver (2007) ‘Intermediality and
Interarts Studies’, p. 19. Wolf’s distinction between ‘overt’ and ‘covert’ interme-
diality partly corresponds to my distinction between combination and integration
of media and mediation and transformation of media. However, I ﬁnd it deeply
problematic to state that an artefact of ‘overt’ intermediality is distinguished by
qualities that are ‘immediately discernible on its surface’ and by way of limit-
ing ‘overt’ intermediality to cases where ‘the signiﬁers of two media are apparent
and distinct’ the category becomes very narrow: Wolf (1999) The Musicalization
of Fiction, pp. 40, 50. What is, actually, the surface of a multimodal medium, and
what does it mean to say that the signiﬁers of a medium are apparent? Only when
it comes to technical media, actual physical objects or phenomena, is it possi-
ble to talk about overt or direct co-presence of media, and since most qualiﬁed
media are mediated by various and also altering technical media the distinctions
overt–covert and direct–indirect have limited value when it comes to qualiﬁed
media.
43. Theatre is thus deﬁnitely extremely multimodal and it integrates many basic and
qualiﬁed media, but it is an overstatement to say that ‘theatre is a hypermedium
that incorporates all arts and media’. See F. Chapple and C. Kattenbelt (2006)
‘Key Issues in Intermediality in Theatre and Performance’ in F. Chapple and
C. Kattenbelt (eds) Intermediality in Theatre and Performance (Amsterdam and New
York: Rodopi), p. 20. Cf. C. Kattenbelt (2006) ‘Theatre as the Art of the Performer
and the Stage of Intermediality’, in the same volume, p. 32.
44. Also, a simple juxtaposition involves some kind of integration. If an image and a
visual text are combined, for instance, it matters which one of them is above or
to the left of the other.
45. Mitchell mainly deals with ‘verbal and visual representation’, as in Mitchell
(1994) ‘Beyond Comparison’.
46. In his later writings, Mitchell’s notion of mixed media becomes more articu-
lated. In Mitchell (2005) ‘There are no Visual Media’, he also straightforwardly
acknowledges the differences between media and states that, ‘If all media are
mixed media, they are not all mixed in the same way, with the same propor-
tions of elements’ (p. 260). This is a very important step towards the possibility


── PAGE 38 ──
PROOF
46
Media, Modalities and Modes
of creating ‘a more nuanced taxonomy of media based in sensory and semiotic
ratios’ (p. 264). However, the relation between the sensorial and the semiotic
modalities (in my terminology) is not always apparent in Mitchell’s account.
He argues that ‘Subtitles, intertitles, spoken and musical accompaniment made
“silent” ﬁlm anything but silent’ (p. 258), but to me it is not obvious in which
way subtitles and intertitles break the silence. Although one may take account
of the perceiver’s subvocalization, the basic difference between silent ﬁlm and
sound ﬁlm remains clear, if not unambiguous. His assertion that photography is
so riddled with language ‘that it is hard to imagine what it would mean to call
it a purely visual medium’ (p. 260) implies that a particular kind of mainly sym-
bolic semiosis affects the sensorial perception, which is obviously not the case.
Symbolic language that can be directly seen on or otherwise deduced from the
screen or surface of moving or static images still has its origin in the visual (and
has effect only on our photoreceptors), although it is not iconic, in the semiotic
sense of the term – but the modes of the semiotic modality are something other
than the modes of the sensorial modality. In spite of its conventional signs, nei-
ther silent ﬁlm nor photography can be heard, smelled or tasted – they can only
be seen and, in a rudimentary way felt, but that has hardly any bearing on the
aspects of texts and language. Mitchell’s important main point is, it seems, to
emphasize the blurring of modal borders in the perception of media, but I think
one must also emphasize those borders that do exist in spite of the perceptual
and cognitive operations of the recipients.
47. Cf. Müller’s distinction between ‘technical conditions’ and ‘medial products’
in J. E. Müller (1996) Intermedialität: Formen moderner kultureller Kommunikation
(Münster: Nodus Publikationen), p. 23; see also pp. 81–2.
48. As I deﬁne the notion of technical medium, it is narrower than, for instance,
the notion of ‘physical media’ as circumscribed in C. Clüver (2007) ‘Intermedi-
ality and Interarts Studies’, p. 30. Devices used for the realization of media, but
not tools used only for the production or storage of media, are technical media.
The brush and the typewriter are tools of production that are separated from the
material manifestations of media and cannot be seen as technical media accord-
ing to my deﬁnition, although they count as physical media in Clüver’s sense.
Oil on canvas and ink on paper, however, are technical media. The ﬂute and the
video camera are partly tools for production and partly devices for the realization
of media and can hence also be seen as technical media. Some technical media,
such as ink on paper, both store and display basic and qualiﬁed media, whereas
a computer hard disk, a device for storage only, is not a technical medium in the
sense that is emphasized here.
49. See Rajewsky, this volume.
50. In other contexts, of course, it is vital to consider not only the display but also the
production and storage of basic and qualiﬁed media. When discussing qualiﬁed
media such as art forms, for instance, many distinctive features that can be seen
as operational qualifying aspects are connected to the production and storage of
media. Traditional live theatre is produced and displayed by a range of technical
media, the bodies of the actors being the most important, but it should not,
and actually it cannot, be stored. A ﬁlmed theatre performance can be stored, but
what is being stored is, as a matter of fact, not the performance, but a transformed
version with very different modal and qualiﬁed qualities. A painting, on the other
hand, is not produced by, for instance, oil paint and canvas, but the paint and
canvas both store and display the painting. A motion picture is stored by technical


── PAGE 39 ──
PROOF
Lars Elleström
47
equipment that is connected to and yet distinct from the screen that displays a
copy of the ﬁlm.
51. McLuhan (1994) Understanding Media, p. 245.
52. Cf. the much broader notion of remediation in J. D. Bolter and R. Grusin (1999)
Remediation: Understanding New Media (Cambridge MA and London: MIT Press).
53. The lack of distinction between various forms of ‘representation’, ‘remediation’
and simply ‘similarity’ is perhaps the major obstacle in Bolter and Grusin (1999)
Remediation. It is a very inspiring book, full of interesting observations relevant
for intermedial studies, but the authors’ notions of media and remediation are
conspicuously vague. In their view, a ‘medium’ seems to be both all kinds of
modalities, as understood in the tradition of Kress and van Leeuwen, and all
kinds of media as (not) deﬁned by McLuhan. According to Bolter and Grusin,
all sorts of media can remediate all sorts of media, whether they are techni-
cal, qualiﬁed or something else: ‘our identity’ can be remediated by the internet
(p. 231), ‘the fatal stillness of Antonioni’s ﬁlms’ can be remediated by a computer
game (p. 268) and ‘the printed book’ is remediated by hypertext (p. 272). Alto-
gether, their account gives a good view of the complexity of media relations, but
no theoretical tools to deal with it. Cf. J. Schröter (2008) ‘Das ur-intermediale
Netzwerk und die (Neu-)Erﬁndung des Mediums im (digitalen) Modernismus:
Ein Versuch’ in J. Paech and J. Schröter (eds) Intermedialität Analog/Digital: The-
orien – Methoden – Analysen (Munich: Wilhelm Fink), pp. 579–601, whose notion
of ‘Transformational-ontologische Intermedialität’ is severely limited by its close
association to the notion of representation (pp. 589–90).
54. There has been some debate concerning the proper delimitations of the notion
of ekphrasis. In S. Bruhn (2000) Musical Ekphrasis: Composers Responding to Poetry
and Painting (Hillsdale NY: Pendragon Press), the author demonstrates convinc-
ingly that the notion has an unexplored capacity to explain much more than
literary transformations of images. Cf. S. Bruhn (ed.) (2008) Sonic Transformations
of Literary Texts: From Program Music to Musical Ekphrasis (Hillsdale NY: Pendragon
Press).
55. Yvonne Spielmann discusses several ways of understanding intermedial trans-
formation in Y. Spielmann (1998) Intermedialität: Das System Peter Greenaway
(Munich: Wilhelm Fink). However, her main arguments are based on notions
and distinctions that I ﬁnd problematic for reasons declared earlier in this essay:
‘textuality’ versus ‘visuality’ and ‘monomediality’ versus ‘multimediality’ versus
‘intermediality’.
56. I. O. Rajewsky (2002) Intermedialität (Tübingen and Basel: A. Francke Verlag),
pp. 12–3, 16–7. Rajewsky does not consider ‘Transmedialität’ to be a case of
intermediality. Cf. the notion of ‘intermedial translation’ introduced by Regina
Schober in this volume.
57. The term ‘media circuit’ is telling. It is used in M. P. Punzi (ed.) (2007) Literary
Intermediality: The Transit of Literature through the Media Circuit (Bern: Peter Lang),
where ‘intermediality’ mainly refers to the phenomenon here characterized as
the transformation of media. Cf. the way the notion of irony is transformed
in the discourses on various arts, as described in L. Elleström (2002) Divine
Madness, or the way narration can be understood in the context of different
media; Marie-Laure Ryan talks about ‘transmedial narratology’ in M.-L. Ryan
(2004) ‘Introduction’ in M.-L. Ryan (ed.) Narrative Across Media: The Languages of
Storytelling (Lincoln and London: University of Nebraska Press), p. 35. The trans-
medial notions of complexity, integration and rhythm are discussed as examples


── PAGE 40 ──
PROOF
48
Media, Modalities and Modes
of ‘inter-medial factors’ in T. M. Greene (1940) The Arts and the Art of Criti-
cism (Princeton: Princeton University Press), pp. 213–26. Ultimately, also notions
such as reception and interpretation are transmedial, of course, and it is vital to
recognize that interpretive strategies, contextualizations and ways to communi-
cate the outcome of interpretation cross all media borders. This is a crucial point
in Bal (1991) Reading Rembrandt.
58. This problem is emphasized in Müller (1996) Intermedialität, pp. 81–2.
59. Cf. the enlightening overview of intermedial positions and issues in I. O.
Rajewsky (2005) ‘Intermediality, Intertextuality, and Remediation: A Literary
Perspective on Intermediality’, Intermédialités (6), pp. 43–64.
60. This is very much stressed by Jørgen Bruhn in his contribution in this volume.


── PAGE 41 ──
PROOF
Index
Adaptation, 200
Adorno, T. W., 77
A fényképezésröl, 197n26
After the End of Art: Contemporary Art and
the Pale of History, 209n3
aleatory intertextuality, 158
Allemann, B., 80n22
Allen, E., 110n18, 214
allusions, 89–90, 153
Ambrose, J. P., 164, 172n6
Amos ou introduction à la métagraphologie,
133n5, 133n11, 133n18
‘Anabasis’, 76–7
Analyzing Musical Multimedia, 234,
236n21
Anderson, L., 40n5, 81–2, 83, 86, 87, 88,
89–90, 93, 94n1, 94n3
‘An Eye for an Ear’, 100–1
Ansichten einer künftigen
Medienwissenschaft, 186n18
anthropocentrism, 114
anthropomorphism, 114
Antonioni, M., 208
Apocalypse Now, 89
apostrophes, 126
Apter, E., 198n41
Architecture, Mouvement, Continuité,
221n4
Aristotle, 80n13
Arnheim, R., 42n18, 201, 209, 210n19
Ars (art and handicraft) notion, 101
Art and Beauty in the Middle Ages, 109n5
artistic triangles, options at creator’s
angle, 138–9
arts
arts of time and arts of space, 11
comprehension in, 137–49
intentionality in, 137–49
intermedial relations between, 11
limits of perception, obstacles at
beholder’s angle, 139–40
and media, boundaries between, 11
mediation in, 137–49
Trinity and ‘artistic triangle’, relation
between, 138
various artistic triangles, options at
creator’s angle, 138–9
Arts and the Art of Criticism, The, 48n57
Arts and Their Interrelations, The, 42n14,
42n17
Artwork – Text – Medium: Steps en
Route to Intermediality, 197n10,
209n7
Arvidson, J., 39n3, 186n17, 235n1,
236n19
Askander, M., 39n3, 186n17, 235n1
Aspden, S., 172n9
‘associative’, category, 156
association, differential model, 152
Audiovisions: Cinema and Television as
Entr’actes in History, 251n6
‘auditory text’, 29
avant-garde context, 169
axe de pertinence of intermediality,
237–52
in digitalized world, 248–9
dispositifs, 239–44
dynamic intermedial networks, 242
hybridity, 245–6
interartiality, 244
intermediality as a process, 238–41
intertextuality, 244
medium, 237–8
new medium, 237–8
in scientiﬁc community, 241–3
television (test case), 238–41, 246–8;
making meaning, 246–8;
materiality, 246–8; media
encounters, 246–8
Backman, E. L., 108, 110n18
Bakhtin, M., 106, 210n12
ballad, 99–110
see also Medieval ballad and
Romanesque church
253


── PAGE 42 ──
PROOF
254
Index
Bal, M., 41n9, 48n57, 85, 95n16, 166,
173n25
Band of Outsiders, A, 215–18
Banks, I., 228
Barricelli, J.-P., 80n28
Barthes, R., 190, 191, 193, 197n19,
197n22, 197n27, 197n34, 198n38,
204, 209n11, 218, 230, 241
basic media, 5, 12, 27–31
Basic Writings, 109n11, 134n25, 134n29
Bataille, G., 232
Bateman, J. A., 40n8
Baudry, J.-L., 238, 239, 246, 251n9,
252n22, 252n33
Bayreuth, 251n2
Bazin, A., 191, 197n21, 197n25
Beckett, S., 220
Benjamin, W., 40n5, 42n18, 95n22,
121n1, 165, 172n18, 192
Berggren, D., 76
Berio, L., 91
Berlin Alexanderplatz, 81, 86, 94n2,
95n23
Bernhart, W., 80n15, 121n2, 172n9
Bernsen, N. O., 40n7
Bertrand, A., 69, 73, 74, 75
Beukes, M., 42n18
Biblia Pauperum, 104
biopoetry of Eduardo Kac, 175–86
electronic music, 182
Genesis, 175–7, 184
intermediality in, 184
‘medial transposition’, 183
‘sensorial modality’, 182
‘spatiotemporal modality’, 182
verbal language medium, 178
written languages, 180
Birders: Tales of a Tribe, 122n20
Birds and Light: The Art of Lars Jonsson,
123n21
Birds in Literature, 122n16
Birds of Eastern and Central North
America, 116
Bishara, N., 95n26
Black, M., 69, 70, 72, 76, 77, 79n2,
80n21
Bladen, R., 2, 3
Bleckmann, U., 40n3
Blind Ossian, 162n11
Block, F. W., 185n16
Blush, 56
Bodies, 57, 59–60
Bohn, R., 180, 186n18
Bolter, J. D., 47n52, 47n53, 212, 221n7,
221n9
Book of Mutations and In Our Own Image,
The, 185n13
borders, media, 28
between different medial forms of
articulation, 64
conventionalization in, 61–2
in current debate about intermediality,
problematic status of, 51–68
frames, 64
habitualization in, 61–2
‘individual media’, 53–4, 62, 64
intermedial references, 62–3
intramedial references, 62
modal, 28–30
qualiﬁed, 28–30
Bordwell, D., 200, 209n6
Bourcier, P., 110n16
Breton, A., 144
Broich, U., 161n8
Bruhn, J., 6, 8, 39n3, 48n60, 132n2,
133n17, 161n2, 172n13, 186n17,
225–36
Bruhn, S., 47n54, 73, 74, 75, 80n15,
137–49, 172n12, 236n16
Burks, W., 94n6
Burns, R., 155, 156
Byrman, G., 110n14
calligrammatic rewriting of ekphrasis,
218–21
Calum Colvin: Fragments of Ancient Poetry,
162n14
Camera Lucida, 190
Cantos of Ezra Pound, The, 171n2
categories and medial difference,
159–61
Celan, P., 69, 76, 77, 78, 80n22, 80n23,
80n24, 80n28
Changing Borders: Contemporary Positions
in Intermediality, 39n3, 186n17,
235n1, 235n2, 235nn6–7, 236n19
Changizi, M., 95n13
Chapple, F., 45n43
Chew, S., 166, 173n24


── PAGE 43 ──
PROOF
Index
255
Choros as an ecclesiastical medium,
107–9
Religious Dances in the Christian Church
and in Popular Medicine, 108
Christos Pantokrator, 103
churches
early medieval church as
mass-medium, 102–4
Romanesque church, 99–110
cinema, 25
Cinémas, 251n21
cinematic ekphrasis, 213
cinematic imagination, media in, 211–12
calligrammatic rewriting of ekphrasis,
218–21
heterotopic space, cinema as, 212
intermediality, the cinematic
‘in-between’ and ekphrasis,
211–14
Life of her Own/Her Life to Live, A, 214
mise en abyme, 214–15
‘Museum of Memory’, 218–21
‘picto-ﬁlms’, 213
‘The Oval Portrait’, 214
vertigo of media, 214–15
Vivre sa vie, 214
Cisneros, J., 251n20
Classical Music and Postmodern
Knowledge, 79n1, 80n19
Clüver, C., 7, 39n3, 40n4, 45n42, 46n48,
67n24, 149n7, 172n12, 175–86, 226,
235n2, 235n3, 235n7, 236n16, 241,
244, 251n4, 252n28
Cock and a Bull Story, A, 200
Cocker, M., 122n20
cognitive modalities, Greimas’s semiotic
square of, 206
Colapietro, V., 95n10, 95n19
Coleridge, S. T., 241
Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce,
43n26
Collins Bird Guide, 116
Collins, F. H., 116, 121n3, 149n3, 149n4,
206, 210n13
Colors of Rhetoric: Problems in the Relation
between Modern Literature and
Painting, The, 41n11
Colvin, C., 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158,
159, 160, 161n11, 162n11, 162n14,
162n17, 162n19, 162n26
Complete Poetical Works of Amy Lowell,
The, 172n5
Complete Works of Aristotle, The, 80n13
Conradie, J., 42n18
contextual qualifying aspect of
media, 24
contiguity (indexical signs), semiotic
modality, 22–3
convention (symbolic signs), semiotic
modality, 22–3
conventionalization, in medial borders,
61–2
Convergence, 44n35
Cook, N., 232–3
Coppola, F. F., 89
Corot, C., 218
Cowell, H., 133n21
Critical Inquiry, 197n14
Cultural Functions of Intermedial
Exploration, 172n13
Cultural Studies Reader, The, 236n17
Curry-Lindahl, C., 122n19
Dahlstrom, D. O., 41n11
Dalhaus, C., 80n11
dance, 26
of intermediality, 199–210, see also
under ﬁlm
Danielson, E., 110n15
Dansk litteraturhistorie, 109n7
Dante, Alighieri, 101, 109n6, 133n10
Danto, A. C., 199, 209n3
Deane, S. W., 109n11
de Behar, L. B., 95n21
Deely, J., 95n19
de Hooch, P., 206
Dencker, K. P., 185n16
Derrida, J., 70
de Troyes, C., 109n12
De vulgari eloquentia: Über das Dichten in
der Muttersprache, 101, 109n6
Den omsnudde verda: Ein studie i dei norske
skjemteballadane, 109n14
deontologization, 127–8
Der kinematographische Apparat:
Geschichte und Gegenwart einer
interdisziplinären, 252n33
Description: In Literature and Other Media,
121n2


── PAGE 44 ──
PROOF
256
Index
Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays, The,
210n12
‘dialogicity’, 156
Dickinson, E. C., 121n3
Die Perspektive als ‘symbolische Form’,
210n16
Die Räume der Maler: Zur Bilderzählung
seit Giotto, 210n14
differential model, for intermediality,
151–3
‘allusion’, 153
association, 152–3
‘indeterminate marking’, 153
referentiality, 152–3
re-presentation, 152–3
‘selectivity’, 153
‘structurality’, 153
digitalized world, intermediality in,
248–9
Discourse, Vision, and Cognition,
121n1
discursive remedy or the (critical)
intervention, 194–6
dispositifs, 239–44
Divine Madness: On Interpreting
Literature, Music, and the Visual
Arts Ironically, 42n18, 47n57, 139,
149n2
Döblin, A., 81–2, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 93,
94n4, 95n23
Dogville, 61
Doppelbegabungen, 226
Dreyer, C., 109n4
Dreyer, C. T., 214
During, S., 236n17
early medieval church as mass-medium,
102–4
Christos Pantokrator, 103
Majestas Domini, 103
presbyterium, 103
Eckstein, L., 172n13
ecocriticism, 119–21
Ecocriticism Reader: Landmarks in
Literary Ecology, The, 123n29
Eco, U., 109n5
Eduardo Kac: Genesis, 185n8
Eichner, T., 40n3
ekphrasis, 34, 109n13, 124, 160, 214–15
‘art of memory’, 215
‘art of oblivion’, 215
Band of Outsiders, A, 215–16
calligrammatic rewriting of, 218–21;
Histoire(s) du Cinema, 219; Letter
to Jane: An Investigation About a
Still, 219
Ekphrasis: The Illusion of the Natural
Sign, 209n2
ekphrastic metaphors pointing to the
other of ﬁlmic image, 217–18
as a ‘ﬁgure of oblivion’, 215–17
and poetics of in-between in Jean-Luc
Godard’s cinema, 212–22, see also
cinematic imagination, media in
Sentimental dialogue, 216
W. J. T. Mitchell deﬁning, 212
Eliot, T. S., 165, 172n17
Elleström, L., 11–48, 66n7, 79n7, 99,
111, 112, 120, 124, 132n2, 134n26,
139, 149n2, 160, 161n2, 164, 169,
172n8, 174n36, 179, 182, 183, 225,
226, 227, 228, 229, 235n1, 241,
251n17, 252n25
Éluard, P., 144
Eming, J., 222n23
Encryption Stones, 179, 185n8
English Literary History, 133n15
Englund, A., 5, 69–80, 173n30
Erich Doﬂein: Festschrift zum 70.
Geburtstag, 173n34
Erkenntnisinteresse, 230
Escher, M. C., 137
Estes, R., 67n22
Europas fåglar: En fälthandbok, 121n3,
122n12
exteroceptors, 18
‘extracompositional intermediality’, 56
Fågelguiden: Europas och
Medelhavsområdets fåglar i fält, 122n3
Fågelliv betyder orden: Vandringar i Erik
Rosenbergs riken, 122n19
Fåglar i Europa med Nordafrika och
Mellanöstern, 122n3, 122n7, 122n10,
122n14, 122n17, 123n21, 123n23,
123n26, 123n28
Fåglar i Sverige, 115–16, 122n3, 122n8,
122n13, 123n22, 123n24, 123n27


── PAGE 45 ──
PROOF
Index
257
Fassbinder, R. W., 81, 86, 87, 94n1, 94n2
Felten, U., 251n11
Festskrift tillägnad Erik Rosenberg på
50-årsdagen 19 17/8 52, 122n19
Fetishism as Cultural Discourse, 198n41
fetishization, 191–192
Field Guide to the Birds of Eastern and
Central North America, A, 122n6,
122n7, 122n10, 122n11, 122n12
Field Guide to the Birds of South-East Asia,
A, 121n3, 122n6
ﬁeld guides, intermediality of, 111–23
bird sounds, transcription of, 115
Birds of Eastern and Central North
America, 116
Collins Bird Guide, 116
contents of, 112
ecocriticism, 119–21
Fåglar i Sverige, 115–16
image, 113–14
images compared, 116–17
keys in, 112
mediated aspects, 112
text, 114
‘ﬁgure of oblivion’, ekphrasis as, 215–17
ﬁlm, 199–210
Film als Baustelle: Das Kino und seine
Paratexte: Cinema and Its Paratexts,
252n42
Film and Literature, 209n4
Film as Art, 210n19
Film History: An Introduction, 209n6
medium speciﬁcity and intermediality
in, semiotic approach, 199–210;
conceptuality, 200; deﬁning
(inter)mediality, tango metaphor,
202–4; Image and Narrative, 201;
‘semiotic mediatics’, 201–2; space
and time, description and
narration, 204–5; ‘writer’s
movies’, 200
see also ‘meaning making’ in ﬁlm
Finlay, I. H., 3
Fischer-Lichte, E., 52, 66n9, 95n17,
95n18
Fischer, O., 40n5, 42n18, 95n17, 95n18,
95n22
ﬁxed sequentiality, 19
Foltinek, H., 67n26, 250n1
Fonda, J., 219
Forman, R. K. C., 134n24
Fortuina, 91
Fossil Folds, 185n13
Foucault, M., 204, 209n11, 217, 220,
221n4, 222n15
Foucault Reader: An Introduction to
Foucault’s Thought, The, 210n11
Fragments of Ancient Poetry, 153–7,
162n11
‘associative’, category, 156
‘dialogicity’, 156
‘re-presentative’ category, 156
Francoeur, L., 240, 251n16
Froger, M., 236n16, 251n19, 251n20
Führer, H., 39n3, 186n17, 235n1
Future of the Image, The, 222n22
Gadamer, H.-G., 139
Gale, I., 154, 162n16, 162n21, 162n24
Gandelman, C., 206, 210n15
Gandhi, M., 138
García Márquez, G., 205
Garncarz, J., 44n31
Gaspard de la nuit, 73
Gaudreault, A., 44n35, 240
Geistliche Gesangswerk: Werkgruppe 3,
80n27
Gems: A Censored Anthology, 133n19
Genesis, 7, 175–7, 185n13, 186n19
‘genetic’ conception of intermediality,
56
Genette, G., 72, 80n12, 243, 244
Gesammelte Werke in Sieben Bänden,
80n22, 80n28
Gesamtkunstwerk, 211, 241
GFP Bunny, 175
Gibaldi, J., 80n29
Giotto di Bondone, 206, 210n14
Glaser, S. A., 186n26
Glass, P., 138
Godard, J.-L., 8, 66n13, 200, 211–22
Goodman, N., 71, 79n9, 160, 162n33
Gorin, J.-P., 219
Gothic period, 104
Götrick, K., 45n42
Gould, S. J., 123n32
Granström, B., 40n7
Grant, P. J., 122n3
Greber, E., 66n12
Greenaway, P., 47n55, 153, 200, 221n2


── PAGE 46 ──
PROOF
258
Index
Greene, T. M., 48n57
Greimas, A., 202, 205, 206, 210n13
Grivel, C., 65n1, 243
Grosz, E., 194, 198n41
Grusin, R., 47n52, 47n53, 212, 221n7,
221n9
Guide to Bird Song: Descriptions and
Diagrams of the Songs and Singing
Habits of Land Birds and Selected
Species of Shore Birds, A, 122n15
Gumbrecht, H.-U., 247, 252n35,
252n38, 252n40
Gyáni, G., 196, 198n48
habitualization, in medial borders, 61–2
Handbook of Semiotics, 94n6
Hanslick, E., 76
Hao, Y., 95n13
Harald Wiberg: En konstnär, 122n18
Harawi, 144–5
Hatﬁeld, G., 42n17
Heart of Darkness, 89
Hedling, E., 67n24, 149n7, 172n12,
172n13, 222n16
Heffernan, J. A. W., 41n11, 43n20, 143,
149n7
Heidegger, M., 129, 130–1, 134n25,
134n29
Helbig, J., 39n2, 44n31
Herman, D., 66n17, 235n8, 235n13
Hermenetka, 91–2, 95n34
‘cyberart ritual’, 93
mappings, 91–2
heteromediality, 8, 225–36
centrality of marginality, 233–5
deﬁning, 229–30
heteromedial text, 228
ideology and, 230–2
interart studies and intermediality
studies, 225–7
Nicholas Cook, 232–3
W. J. T. Mitchell, 232–3
heterotopic space, cinema as, 212
Hickethier, K., 248, 252n39
Higgins, D., 67n24, 159, 162n30, 173n25
Histoire de la dance en Occident, 110n16
Histoire(s) du Cinema, 219–21, 222n23
Hodnett, E., 123n31
Hölderlin, F., 78
Hollom, P. A. D., 121n3
Holšánová, J., 121n1
Home of the Brave, 94n3
Horizons: The Poetics and Theory of the
Intermedia, 67n24
House, D., 40n7
Hranitzky, Á., 204
Huber, W., 236n17
Human Nature, 186n19
humanities, intermediality approach in,
241–3
Hunt, D., 185n8
hybridity concept, 67n30
and intermediality, 244
Hybridkultur Medien Netze Künste, 252n31
hypergraphics, 127–8, 130, 131
iconotextual, 131
notionless, 131
iconic development in Romanesque
period, essential features of, 104
Iconicity in Language and Literature, 40n5,
42n18
Iconology: Image, Text, Ideology, 41n9
iconotext, 127
iconotextual hypergraphics, 130, 131
Icons, Texts, Iconotexts: Essays on Ekphrasis
and Intermediality, 132n1, 133n20,
161n3
Idea of Spatial Form, The, 43n19
ideology and heteromediality, 230–2
Igor Strawinsky: Trois Pièces Pour Quatuor à
Cordes: Analyse und Deutung, 173n32
image, in ﬁeld guides, 113–14
images compared, 116–17
‘mug shot’, 113
Image and Code, 42n12
Image and Narrative, 201
Image and Text: Studies in the Illustration
of English Literature, 123n31
Imaged Words &Worded Images, 185n16
‘imagination’, 163–4
Imagining Language: An Anthology,
133n19
‘in-between in’ Jean-Luc Godard’s
cinema, ekphrasis and poetics of,
212–22
intermediality, 211–14
‘indeterminate marking’, 153
‘individual media’, 53–4, 62, 64, 66n7
Insistent Images, 40n5, 95n22


── PAGE 47 ──
PROOF
Index
259
interart and intermediality studies,
225–7
combination, 226
integration, 226
medium, deﬁning, 227
transformation, 226
Interart Poetics: Essays on the Interrelation
of the Arts and Media, 67n24, 149n7,
172n12, 222n16
Inter-Art/Interart Studies, 66n9
‘intertextuality’ notion, 151, 154, 160
interartiality and intermediality, 244
‘interlingual’ translation, 166
intermedia conﬁgurations, 67n24
intermedial, restrictions of, 126–9
intermedial artwork, 153–6
Fragments of Ancient Poetry, 153–5
‘intertextuality’ notion, 154
intermedial exchanges, in ‘Stravinsky’s
Three Pieces “Grotesques”, for String
Quartet’, 163–74
see also individual entry
intermedial ‘imagination’, 163–4
intermedial references, 62
of intermediality, 56
intermedial relations, model for
understanding, 11–48
intermedial self-reference, 89
Intermedial topography, 69–80
see also metaphorical
interaction/metaphoricity
intermedial transformations, 34
intermedial references, 34
medial transposition, 34
transmediality, 34
intermedial translation, see translation,
intermedial
Intermedialität, 34, 48n58, 65n4, 172n10,
252n27, 252n30
Intermedialität: Analog/Digital, 39n3,
47n53, 251n3
Intermedialität: Das System Peter
Greenaway, 47n55
Intermedialität: Formen moderner
kultureller Kommunikation, 46n47,
221n5, 251n21
‘Intermedialiät’: Kommentierungen und
Bibliographiee, 251n3
Intermedialität: Theorie und Praxis eines
interdisziplinären Forschungsgebiets,
221n3, 252n23
Intermedialität: Vom Bild zum Text, 40n3
Intermédialité et socialite: Histoire et
gégraphie d’un concept, 236n16,
251n19
Intermédialités, 48n59, 186n25, 222n19,
252n26, 252n35
Intermedialites, 236n17
Intermedialitet, 95n14, 235n6
intermediality, 11, 27–35, 37, 45n40
borders in, 28–9
dance theatre, 56
debate about, 51–68, see borders,
media
deﬁnition, 46, 51–2; the tango
metaphor, 202–4
‘extracompositional intermediality’,
56
‘genetic’ conception of, 56
groups of phenomena in, 55; in
narrower sense of intermedial
references, 55; in narrower sense
of media combination, 55; in
narrower sense of medial
transposition, 55
Intermediality in Theatre and
Performance, 45n43
Intermediality: The Teachers’ Handbook
of Critical Media Literacy, 40n4
‘intracompositional intermediality’, 56
‘moving image’ and ‘still image’,
relations between, 28
multimodality and, 4
and performativity, 85–8
Peter Wagner deﬁnition, 124
plurimediality, 56
qualitative conceptions of, 55
and self-referentiality, 88–94
sub-medium, 29
intermediality, pragmatic approach to,
150–62
aleatory intertextuality, 158
categories and medial difference,
159–61
differential model, 151–3, see also
individual entry
Fragments, intertextual components of,
156–7


── PAGE 48 ──
PROOF
260
Index
intermediality, pragmatic approach
to – continued
intermedial operations, categorizing,
151–2
‘intertextuality’, 151
intertextuality? intermediality?
multimediality?, 157–9
‘multimedial intermediality’, 160
obligatory intertextuality, 158
interoceptors, 18
‘intersemiotic translation’, 7, 166
Interrelations of Literature, 80n29
intertextual self-reference, 89
Intertextualität: Formen, Funktionen,
anglistische Fallstudien, 161n8
intertextuality, 230
and intermediality, 244
Intertextuality: Research in Text Theory,
161n4
Intertextuality: Theory and Practices,
162n27
‘intracompositional intermediality’, 56
‘intralingual’ translation, 166
intramedial references, 62
Introduction à une nouvelle poésie et à une
nouvelle musique, 133n6, 133n8,
134n32
Isou, I., 124–5, 127, 129, 132, 133n5,
133n6, 133n7, 133n8, 133n9,
133n10, 133n11, 133n18, 133n19,
133n23, 134n32
Jahn, M., 235n8
Jakobson, R., 7, 165–6, 173n22
James, W., 81, 143, 161n1, 175, 176
Jamme, C., 80n24
Jansson, S.-B., 110n17
Jean-Luc Godard’s cinema, 212–22
ekphrasis and poetics of in-between
in, 212–22, see also cinematic
imagination, media in
Jersild, M., 110n17
Jia, Zhang Ke, 200
Johansen, J. D., 95n10
Johansson, C., 41n10
Jones, S., 44n35
Jongeneel, E., 161n5, 162n22
Jonsson, B. R., 110n15, 110n17
Jonsson, L., 116, 117, 118, 119, 122n3,
122n7, 122n10, 122n11, 122n14,
122n17, 123n21, 123n23, 123n26,
123n28
Jonze, S., 200
Jost, F., 252n34
Joyce, J., 172n4
Kac, E., 7, 175–86
Kant, I., 42n17
Karina, A., 214, 215
Karlsson, I., 40n7
Karnicky, J., 122n4, 122n20
Kaspersen, S., 109n7
Kattenbelt, C., 45n43
Kaufman, P., 200
Keitel, E., 236n17
Kemp, W., 206, 210n14
Kermode, F., 172n17
Kiernan, R., 231, 236n18
King, B., 102, 121n3, 122n6, 154, 175,
176
Király, H., 7, 8, 44n36, 199, 201, 203,
205, 207, 209
Kivy, P., 233
Klee, P., 192, 218
Kneale, J. D., 133n15
Kostelanetz, R., 185n16
Kramer, L., 79n1, 80n19
Krämer, S., 54, 66n14
Krasznahorkai, L., 204, 205, 209n9,
209n10
Kress, G., 14, 40n8, 47n53
Kristeva, J., 230
Kuklick, B., 161n1
Kværndrup, S., 6, 99, 101, 103, 105, 107,
109n7, 109n13
La créatique ou la novatique, 133n10
La dictature lettriste: Cahiers d’un nouveau
régime artistique, 133n9, 133n23
Lagerroth, U.-B., 67n24, 149n7, 172n12,
172n13, 222n16
Lakoff, G., 161n6
Langer, S. K., 39n1, 43n23
language, 125
anticonceptual language, 125
Isou’s deﬁnition, 125
Language of Images, The, 42n18, 43n22
Languages of Art: An Approach to the
Theory of Symbols, 79n9, 162n33
and music, relation between, 76–7


── PAGE 49 ──
PROOF
Index
261
Laokoön: An Essay on the Limits of Painting
and Poetry, 11, 39n1, 43n21, 44n34
Lapham, L. H., 40n6
Las Meninas essay, 217
Laverette, M., 201
Lawson, J., 162n12
Leão, L., 83, 86, 91, 92, 95n34
Le chevalier au lion, 109n12
L’effet cinéma, 251n9
‘Le gibet’, 74
Lehmann, A. J., 66n13, 222n23
Lehtonen, M., 40n4, 226, 235n4
Leigh, M., 200
Leitgeb, C., 67n26, 250n1
Le lettrisme, les creations et les createurs,
133n13
Le petit soldat, 218
Lesbian Fetishism, 194, 198n41
Les signes s’envolent: Pour une sémiotique
des actes de langage culturels, 251n16
Lessing, G. E., 11, 25, 39n1, 43n21,
44n34, 236n19
Les Noces, 174n37
Lethe: Kunst und Kritik des Vergessens,
222n13
L’être et le néant: Essai d’ontologie
phenomenologique, 134n28
Letter to Jane: An Investigation About a
Still, 219
Lettrism, visual apostrophes in, 124–34
anticonceptual language, 125
comparables, 130
discernible levels of, 130
iconotextual hypergraphics, 130–1
intermediality in, 126–9; restrictions,
126–9
language, 125
lettrist writing, 125–6
‘meaningless’ visual apostrophes, 131
nothing with words, getting, 129–32
notionless hypergraphics, 131
signiﬁcation in Lettrist writing, 129
visual apostrophes, 126–7
visuality, 125
written and the visual, tension
between, 125
‘writing nothingness’, 129
Levy, K., 149n5
Life of her Own/Her Life to Live, A, 214
Lina, P., 87
Lindemann, U., 186n17
List of Recent Holarctic Bird Species, 122n5
Listening In: Music, Mind, and the
Modernist Narrative, 79n1
Literary Intermediality: The Transit of
Literature through the Media Circuit,
47n57
Literary Modernism and Musical Aesthetics:
Pater, Pound, Joyce, and Stein, 172n4
Literature, Transcendence, Avant-Garde,
133n4
Literaturwissenschaft – intermedial –
interdisziplinär, 67n26, 250n1
Ljungberg, C., 5, 28, 40n5, 42n18,
45n40, 81–95
Lodato, S. M., 172n9
Lommel, M., 251n11
Lönnroth, L., 109n7
Lowell, Amy
‘Stravinsky’s Three Pieces “Grotesques”,
for String Quartet’, 163–74, see also
individual entry
Lüdeke, R., 66n12
Lüders, O., 87
Luhmann, N., 53
Lund, H., 39n3, 45n42, 67n24, 95n14,
149n7, 157, 162n22, 172n12,
186n17, 222n16, 226, 230, 235n1,
235n6, 235n9
Lundquist, J., 235n1
Lutwack, L., 122n15, 122n16
Luz & Letra: ensaios de arte, literatura e
comunicação, 185n2
Lyon, T. J., 120, 123n29
Maassen, I., 66n13, 222n23
MacPherson, J., 153, 154, 155, 156,
157, 158
Madden, J., 200
Madonna, 233, 234
Magritte, R., 234
Magyar Lettre Internationalee, 197n3
Majestas Domini, 103
Making Meaning: Inference and Rhetoric in
the Interpretation of Cinema, 209n6
Mallarmé, S., 215, 216
Manifesto, 125
mappings in Hermenetka, 91–2
Maria, J., 103, 107, 108
Marion, P., 44n35, 236n16


── PAGE 50 ──
PROOF
262
Index
Mary of Egypt, 140–3, 149n3, 149n4
mass media, 31
material modality, 15, 17
materiality, 15
‘auditory’ material, 15
immateriality and, 15
‘visual’ material, 15
Matrizes da linguagem e do pensamento,
94n8
Maurer, I., 251n11
McCormick, E. A., 39n1
McLuhan, M., 31, 40n6, 43n29, 47n51,
47n53, 90, 99, 100, 101, 102, 109n2,
109n8, 237, 239, 247, 251n8,
251n10, 251n12, 252n29, 252n32,
252n37
‘meaning making’ in ﬁlm, 205–9
cognitive modalities, Greimas’s
semiotic square of, 206
freedom, 207
independence, 207
medium concept, 208
obedience, 207
power, 206
powerlessness, 207
Reading Pictures, Viewing Texts, 206
showing medium, 207
systematic language, 205
telling medium, 207
transmediatic chronotopic language,
208
understanding, 206
Méchoulan, E., 243, 252n26
media
basic media, 27, 36
borders, 28
combination and integration of, 28,
45n42
‘form’ and ‘content’ of, connection
between, 30
Elleström’s conditions for, 227;
material modality, 227; semiotic
modality, 227; sensorial modality,
227; spatiotemporal modality, 227
Elleström’s deﬁnition of, 227
from a hermeneutical point of view, 13
mass media, 31
media combination category, of
intermediality, 56
mediation and transformation of, 28,
45n42
modalities of, 11–48
modes of, 36
qualiﬁed media, 27
qualifying aspects of, 24–7, 35
remediation, 31
spatiality levels in, 20
technical medium, 30, 36
temporality in, 20–1
see also qualifying aspects of media
Media Encounters and Media Theories, 39,
44n37, 251n5, 251n7, 252n23,
252n34
Media inter Media: Essays in Honor of
Claus Clüver, 186n26
Mediale Performanzen, 222n23
medial transposition category, of
intermediality, 55–6
media poetry, 179
Media Poetry: An International
Anthology, 185n1
New Media Poetry, 179
see also biopoetry of Eduardo Kac
media speciﬁcities, genre speciﬁcities
and, comparison, 63
media studies, intermediality approach
in, 241–3
mediation, 32–3
medieval ballad and Romanesque
church, 99–110
Ars (art and handicraft) notion, 101
art in the High Middle Ages, 101
choir (heaven) and nave (Earth),
relation between, 106
Choros as an ecclesiastical medium,
107–9
and cultural interpretation problem,
106–9; ‘ballads of chivalry’, 106
early medieval church as mass
medium, 102–4
feudal society, 102
Gothic period, 104
iconic development, essential features
of, 104
McLuhan’s method, 102
medieval media, understanding,
99–100
‘metaphor’ meaning of, 102
numinous mode, 104–6


── PAGE 51 ──
PROOF
Index
263
sublimes, 104–6
Understanding Media, 99–101
writing and the law, 100–2
‘Mediterranean’ concept, 91
medium, 11, 82
and art forms, comparisons, 14–15
deﬁnition in Wolf, 67n26
description, 13–27, 35
dissimilar notions of, 12
as extensions of man, 13
and ‘form’, 53
Lars Elleström deﬁnition, 124
materiality and perception,
comparison, 15
McLuhan’s sociological theory, 13–14
and ‘medial conﬁguration’, 53
multimodal concept of, implications,
227–9
notions of, 12
in Peircean semiotics, 82
in semiotics, 82
Medium Theory and the Uses of Meaning,
209n8
Mein wunderbares Ich, 252n41
Meisel, L. K., 66n21
Memory, History, Forgetting, 197n5,
198n52
meontologization, 6, 126–9
Mertens, M., 251n3
Messiaen, O., 133n21, 144, 145, 146, 147
metaphor conception, 69
Aristotelian deﬁnition of, 73
Black’s view, 70
‘interaction view’ of, 69
Metaphor and Musical Thought, 79n1
musico-literary metaphor, 70–1
subjects of, 69; principal subject, 69;
subsidiary subject, 69; tension
between, 71
metaphorical
interaction/metaphoricity, 69–80,
80n20
between music and literature, 71–7;
Maurice Ravel’s piano piece
Gaspard de la nuit, 73–4; as
transmedialized, 75
between music and poetry, 74; ‘Le
gibet’, 74, 76; paratexts, 74
in Black’s sense, 77
intermedial relations in terms of, 69
Mozart’s Exsultate, Jubilate, 78
simultaneity notion, 79
‘transmediality’, 75
wandering phenomena, 75
Middle Ages, ‘medium’ in, 102
Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 43n24
Mitchell, W. J. T., 11, 14–15, 24, 29,
41n9, 41n11, 42n18, 43n22, 43n30,
45n45, 45n46, 46n46, 65n7, 84, 90,
95n9, 95n12, 95n33, 127, 133n16,
188, 190–91, 197n7, 197n20,
197n28, 198n43, 198n51, 199, 200,
202, 209n1, 212, 221n8, 222n13,
222n16, 229, 232–4, 235n12,
236n19, 236n20, 236n24, 236n25,
236n26
mixed media, 45n46
mixed-media conﬁgurations, 67n24
‘modality’, 14
material modality, 15, 17
of media, 11–48
sensorial modality, 15, 17–18
spatiotemporal modality, 15, 19
semiotic modality, 15, 21
‘tones’, 16
modal media border, 28
‘mode’, 14
Models and Metaphors, 79n2
Mohr, J., 191
‘monomediality’, 66n67
Morgan, R. P., 42n18
Morra, J., 166, 173n23, 173n25
Moser, S., 40n5, 95n22, 251n19
Mother Thekla, 140
Mountfort, G., 121n3
Mozart, W. A., 69, 76, 77, 78, 80n24,
80n27
Mullarney, K., 122n3
Müller, J. E., 8, 26, 39n2, 44n37, 46n47,
48n58, 160, 161n2, 180, 186n18,
221n3, 221n5, 236n16, 237–52
multimedia art, intermedial strategies in,
81–95
performativity, 85–8
see also sign, medium as
multimedia conﬁgurations, 67n24
multimodality, 13–14, 37
multimodal concept of medium,
227–9; implications, 227–9


── PAGE 52 ──
PROOF
264
Index
multimodality – continued
Multimodal Discourse: The Modes and
Media of Contemporary
Communication, 40n8
Multimodality and Genre: A Foundation
for the Systemic Analysis of
Multimodal Documents, 40n8
Multimodality in Language and Speech
Systems, 40n7
Munro, T., 42n14, 42n17
‘Museum of Memory’, 218–21
Museum of Unconditional Surrender,
The, 7, 187–98, 196n1, 197n4,
197n6, 197n13, 197n18, 197n23,
197n31, 198n35, 198n39, 198n46,
198n49
coda, 196
discursive remedy or the (critical)
intervention, 194–6
‘fetish’, rewriting, 191–2
intermediality, 188
language conceptualization, 194
narration of past displays, 195
‘an old yellowing photograph’, 190
photograph at the centre, 190–4
photographic medium, themetizing,
187
photography and the photo/graphic,
192–4
ambivalence, 193
diving into the picture, 192–4
ekphrastic description, 192
looking at, 192–4
as a medium of anamnesis, 193
reading, 192–4
position and lens of camera, 188
remediation, 194–6
scopic experience, themetizing, 187
single photograph, 188
‘symbolic’ intermediality, 188
textual anamnesis, 196
Museum of Words: The Poetics of Ekphrasis
from Homer to Ashbery, 149n7
music, 25, 27
and literature, metaphorical
interaction between, 71–4
Musical Ekphrasis: Composers Responding
to Poetry and Painting, 47n53
musical iconicity, 43n28
Musicalization of Fiction: A Study in the
Theory and History of Intermediality,
The, 40n3, 41n10, 44n33, 45n40,
45n42, 65n1, 67n24, 67n26, 80n14,
162n32, 173n28, 226, 229, 235n15
musico-literary artefact as
transmedialized, 75
musico-literary relations as metaphorical
interaction, 71–6
musico-poetic experiment, Three Pieces
“Grotesques”, for String Quartet’
poem, 167–168
‘mutual-exclusivity’, 161n10
Nana, 222n12
Nänny, M., 95n14
Narration in the Fiction Film, 209n6
Narrative Across Media: The Languages of
Storytelling, 47n57
New Grove Dictionary of Music and
Musicians, The, 149n5
New Historicism and Cultural Materialism,
236n18
New Literary History, 122n9
New Media Poetry: Poetic Innovation and
New Technologies, 185n1
‘new speech’, 125
non-ﬁxed sequentiality, 19
Normand, T., 154, 162
nothingness
Heidegger’s notion of, 130
media on the edge of, 124–34, see also
Lettrism, visual apostrophes in
as ‘a slipping away of the whole’, 131
nothing with words, getting, 129–32
Nöth, W., 82, 94n5, 94n7, 95n11, 95n21,
95n26, 95n28, 109n4, 159, 162n31
notionless hypergraphics, 131
Nouledo, C., 251n2
numinous mode and sublime, in
Romanesque period, 104–6
choir (heaven) and nave (Earth),
relation between, 106
obligatory intertextuality, 158
Ochsner, B., 65
Oldörp, A., 59
Olofsson, T., 109–10
Olsen, T. D., 109n7


── PAGE 53 ──
PROOF
Index
265
‘On Linguistic Aspects of Translation’,
166
On Meaning: Selected Writings in Semiotic
Theory, 206, 210n13
On Metaphor, 79n2
Ontology, 162n29
Oosterling, H., 218, 222n19,
222n21
operational qualifying aspect of
media, 25
oral interpretation, 89
Order of Things: An Archaeology of the
Human Sciences, The, 222n15
‘organized non-verbal sound’, 29
Paech, J., 39n3, 44n37, 47n53, 53, 65n2,
66n13, 188, 197n10, 201, 203, 204,
209n7, 221n3, 222n11, 222n23,
243, 251n3, 252n23
Pailliotet, A. W., 40n4
Palearctic Birds, 122n5
Panofsky, E., 201, 207, 208, 210n16
paratexts, 74, 76
Paratexts: Thresholds of Interpretation,
80n12
partially ﬁxed sequentiality, 19
Pater, W., 172n3, 172n4
Peignot, J., 186n16
Peirce and the Notion of Representation,
95n15
Peirce, C. S., 21, 22, 43n26, 83, 85, 94n6,
95n15
Penrose, Roger, ‘seeing is believing’,
137–49
‘impossible triangle’, 137, see also
under arts
musical signiﬁers enriching an
ekphrastic poem (Case study 2),
143–8
sensually or intellectually inaccessible
spiritual signiﬁers (Case study 1),
140–3
performativity, 85–8
intermediality and, 85–8
kinds of, 85
performance and, 86–7
Performativity: A Paradigm for the
Studies of Art and Culture,
95n18
radical sense, 85
strong sense, 85
weak sense, 85
White Lily, 86–8
Perron, P. J., 206, 210n13
Perspective as Symbolic Form, 210n16
Peterson, R. T., 121n3, 122n6
Peterson, V. M., 122n6, 122n7, 122n9,
122n10, 122n11, 122n12
Peth, Á., 8, 211–22
Pﬁster, M., 161n7, 161n8
Phillips, D., 120, 122n9, 123n30
Philosophical Writings, 41n11
photo/graphic traces, 187–98
thematizing photography, 188
see also Museum of Unconditional
Surrender, The
‘photorealism’, 66n21
photorealistic painting, 58–60
‘picto-ﬁlms’, 213
Pictor, A., 108, 110n19
Picture Theory: Essays on Verbal and Visual
Representation, 43n30, 66n67,
133n16, 197n7, 197n20, 197n28,
198n43, 198n51, 199, 200, 209n1,
221n8, 222n14, 222n16, 234,
235n12, 236n24, 236n25
Pictures Into Words: Theoretical and
Descriptive Approaches to Ekphrasis,
161n5, 162n22
Pierrot le fou, 215–17
Plett, H., 151, 157, 160, 161n4, 243
plurimediality, 56
Poems and Translations, 80n26
Poetic Origins and the Ballad, 109n1
Poetics, 40n5
Poetics of Cinema, 209n6
Pöggeler, O., 80n24
Pope Benedict XVI., 107
Pound, E., 77, 80n26, 171n2, 172n4
Pound, L., 109n1
Pragmatism, 161n1
presbyterium, 103
Prieto, E., 79n1
primitivism, 170–1
Problem of Pure Consciousness: Mysticism
and Philosophy, The, 134n24
proprioceptors, 18
Prospero’s Books, 153
Punzi, M. P., 47n57


── PAGE 54 ──
PROOF
266
Index
Qiong, Z., 95n13
qualiﬁed media, 5, 12, 27–31
border, 28
qualifying aspects of media, 24–7
aesthetic and communicative
characteristics, 25–6
cinema, 25
contextual, 24, 33
dance, 26
music, 25, 27
operational, 25, 33
Quiepo, N., 251n11
Quills, 200
quotations, 89–90
Rajewsky, I. O., 5, 30, 34, 39n3, 44n38,
45n41, 46n49, 47n56, 48n59, 51,
53, 55, 57, 59, 61, 63, 65n2, 65n4,
65n5, 66n12, 66n15, 66n20, 67n25,
67n29, 71, 75, 80n10, 80n18,
80n25, 83, 111, 133n3, 133n12,
172n10, 172n11, 183, 186n25,
235n9, 252n24
Rancière, J., 220, 222n22
Ratzinger, Bishop J., 107
Ravel, M., 69, 74
Reading Images: The Grammar of Visual
Design, 40n8
Reading Pictures, Viewing Texts, 206,
210n15
Reading Rembrandt: Beyond theWord-Image
Opposition, 41n9, 48n57
Realists and Nominalists: An Introduction
to Medieval Views of Knowledge,
109n9
Re/collecting Gendered Memory, 197n16,
197n29, 198n44, 198n47
Redeﬁning Literary Semiotics, 95n10
referentiality, 74
differential model, 152
Regard du Fils sur le Fils, 149n10
Regard du silence, 149n10
Reichert, S., 80n22
Reinfandt, C., 172n13
Religious Dances in the Christian Church
and in Popular Medicine, 108
remediation, 31, 194–6, 213
Remediation: Understanding New Media,
47n52, 47n53, 221n7, 221n9
Renaissance: Studies in Art and Poetry, The,
172n3
Renard, 174n37
‘repleteness’, 71
representation, 32, 153, 160
differential model, 152
resemblance (iconic signs), semiotic
modality, 22–3
Reutersvärd, O., 137
Reverdy, P., 144
Ricoeur, P., 76, 79n2, 80n20, 187, 197n5,
198n52
Riesinger, R., 252n33
Riffaterre, M., 158, 162n28, 243
Rilke, R. M., 192
Rimbaud, A., 215, 216
Rissler-Pipka, N., 251n11
Robillard, V., 6, 7, 150–62
Rodriguez, La Mala, 91
Roland Barthes Reader, A, 209n11
Roland Penrose: The Friendly Surrealist: A
Memoir, 149n8
Role of Comparative Literature in the Sharing
of Knowledge and in the Preservation of
Cultural Diversity, The, 95n21
Romanesque church, 99–110
see also Medieval ballad and
Romanesque church
Rosch, E., 161n6
Rosenberg, E., 115, 116, 117, 118, 119,
122n3, 122n8, 122n13, 122n19,
123n22, 123n24, 123n27
Rothberg, M., 189, 197n14
Rothenberg, D., 122n15
Routledge Encyclopedia of Narrative Theory,
The, 66n17
Ruppert, R., 180, 186n18
Ryan, K., 231
Ryan, M.-L., 47n57, 66n17, 235n8
Sabatier, R., 133n13
Sacks, S., 79n2
Sadie, S., 149n5
Sager, L. M., 221n10
Said, E., 194
Saint Anselm, 105, 109n11
Sandgren, H., 111–23
Sándor, K., 7, 133n3, 134n31, 187–98
Santaella, L., 94n8, 95n21
Sartre, J.-P., 134n28, 232


── PAGE 55 ──
PROOF
Index
267
Satan’s Tango, 7, 202–7, 209n9, 209n10
see also ‘meaning making’ in ﬁlm
Satié, A., 126, 130, 131
Saunders, A., 122n15
Schapiro, M., 154, 162n13
Scher, S. P., 78, 80n15, 172n9
Schmidt, E., 44n31, 206, 207, 221n3,
252n23
Schmitz-Emans, M., 186n17
Schneider, F. H., 172n7
Schneider, I., 68n30, 252n31
Schober, R., 7, 47n56, 163–74
Schoenmakers, H., 65n7
Scholz, B. F., 236n19
Schröter, J., 39n3, 44n37, 47n53, 65n2,
251n3
scientiﬁc community, intermediality
concept in, 241–3
Scott, W., 155, 156, 157
Second Life, 248–9
Selected Prose of T. S. Eliot, 172n17
‘selectivity’, 153
self-referentiality
allusions, 89–90
‘braiding’, 90–1
‘cyberart ritual’, 93
Gesamtkunstwerk, 94
Hermenetka, 94
hybrid forms of art and media and, 90
intermedial self-reference, 89
intermediality and, 88–94
intertextual self-reference, 89
‘Mediterranean’ concept, 91
oral interpretation, 89
quotations, 89–90
Self-Reference in the Media, 95n26
synesthesia phenomenon, 90
in terms of iconicity, 88
various media integrated into an
intermedial whole, 90
virtual reality, 90
White Lily, 91–4
Semali, L. M., 40n4
Seminar: A Journal of Germanic
Studies, 80n
semiosis, sign generation, 83
‘semiotic mediatics’, 201–2
semiotic modality, 15, 21
contiguity (indexical signs), 22–3
convention (symbolic signs), 22–3
creation of meaning, 22
pictorial representations, 22
propositional representations, 22
resemblance (iconic signs), 22–3
Semiotics of Poetry, 162n28
Semiotics of the Media: State of the Art,
Projects and Perspectives, 95n27,
109n4
sensorial modality, 15, 17–18
exteroceptors, 18
interoceptors, 18
levels of, 17
modes of, 17
proprioceptors, 18
receptors level, 18
sensation level, 18
sense-data level of, 17–19
Sentimental dialogue, 216
Shakespeare in Love, 200
Shinsuke, S., 95n13
Sichtbares und Sagbares
Text-Bild-Verhältnisse, 66n7
Sievers, R., 167, 173n32
sign, medium as, 83–4
C. S. Peirce doctrine of, 88
iconic, 83
indexical, 83–4
intermediality, 84
‘narrative painting’, 84
‘pure painting’, 84
semiosis, sign generation, 83
symbolic, 83–4
signiﬁcation in Lettrist writing, 129
‘simulation’, 67n23
simultaneity notion, 79
singing ﬂames, 59
Sjöberg, S., 6, 124–34
Solberg, O., 109n14
Solheim, S., 110n15
Sonic Transformations of Literary Texts:
From Program Music to Musical
Ekphrasis, 47n54
Sontag, S., 189, 191, 197n15, 209n11,
218, 222n18
Sound Art, 61
Sowa, J. F., 162n29
Space, Time, Image, Sign: Essays on
Literature and the Visual Arts, 41n11,
43n20
Spangenberg, P. M., 252n31


── PAGE 56 ──
PROOF
268
Index
spatial thinking, 42n18
spatiotemporal modality, 15,
17–24
dimensions of, 19; depth, 19; height,
19; time, 19; width, 19
ﬁxed sequentiality, 19
non-ﬁxed sequentiality, 19
partially ﬁxed sequentiality, 19
represented state, 21
Spielmann, Y., 44n35, 47n55
Spinks, C. W., 95n19
Spitzer, M., 79n1
Stead, A., 166, 173n24
Steiner, W., 41n11, 42n12, 43n24
Stein, G., 172n4
Steinmaurer, T., 251n6
Stephan, R., 168, 173n34
Stewart, M., 149n4
State of the Art, The, 209n3
Still, J., 162n27
Storm, I., 122n18
Stravinsky: A Creative Spring: Russia and
France, 174n37
Stravinsky and the Russian Traditions: A
Biography of the Works through Mavra,
174n37
Stravinsky, I., 7, 163–74
‘Stravinsky’s Three Pieces “Grotesques”, for
String Quartet’ poem, 163–74
avant-garde context, 169
folkloristic elements, 169
intermedial ‘imagination’, 163–4
intermedial translation, 164–5, see also
translation, intermedial
musico-poetic experiment, 167–8
‘primitive’ concept, 170–1
self-referentiality, 168
tonal colour in, 168
‘structurality’, 153
Styles of Radical Will, 222n18
sublimes, in Romanesque period, 104–6
Suchbegriff, 241, 244
Sukorski, W., 91
Superrealist Painting & Sculpture, 66n21
Süss, G., 236n17
Svensson, L., 122n3
Synesthesia and Intersenses: Intermedia,
162n30
synesthesia phenomenon, 90
Tabakowska, E., 40n5, 95n22
Taha, R., 91
Tarkovskij, A., 208
Tarr, B., 7, 202–4, 207–8, 209n9
Taruskin, R., 174n37
Tavener, J., 140, 141, 142, 148, 149n3,
149n4
Taylor, L., 214
technical media, 5, 12, 16, 30
and basic media, relation between, 33
and qualiﬁed media, relation
between, 33
Telepresence & Bio Art: Networking
Humans, Rabbits, & Robots, 175,
185n3, 185n4, 186n20
television, 238–41
Tele-Visionen: Zur Theorie und Geschichte
des Fernsehempfangs, 251n6
Temiz, O., 91
text, in ﬁeld guides, 114
anthropocentrism, 114
anthropomorphism, 114
‘Field marks’, 114
narratives, 114
short notes, 114
text comparison, 117–19
Text as Picture: Studies in the Literary
Transformation of Pictures, 45n42,
235n10
Text-Bilder: Visuelle Poesie international:
Von der Antike bis zur Gegenwart,
185n16
Text Production, 162n28
Theater und Medien/Theater and the Media:
Grundlagen – Analysen – Perspektiven:
Eine Bestandsaufnahme, 65n7
theatre, 29
Theatre, Sacriﬁce, Ritual: Exploring
Forms of Political Theatre, 95n17
thematizing photography, 188
Thomsen, C. W., 68n30, 252n31
Thor, C., 122n19
Three Pieces for String Quartet, 7, 174n37
Thune, H., 235n1
Tides of Manaunaun, The, 133n21
Tidskrift för litteraturvetenskap, 235n1
topographical model, 69–80
meta-reﬂective element, 79, see also
metaphorical
interaction/metaphoricity


── PAGE 57 ──
PROOF
Index
269
‘transcription’, 7
‘Transgenic Art’, 175–86
see also biopoetry of Eduardo Kac
Transcription Jewels, 185n13
transcription of bird sounds, 115
Transfutur: Visuelle Poesie aus der
Sowjetunion, Brasilien und
deutschsprachigen Ländern, 185n16
Transkriptionen, 65n7
Translating Life: Studies in Transpositional
Aesthetics, 173n24
Translation and the Languages of
Modernism: Gender, Politics, Language,
172n14
Translation Studies Reader, The, 172n18,
173n22
translation, intermedial, 164–5
deﬁnition, 165
‘interlingual’, 166
‘intersemiotic’, 166
‘intralingual’, 166
‘On Linguistic Aspects of Translation’,
166
in Modernist literary production, 165
term, 173n25
‘translation’ term, 172n20
transmedialization, 75
Travelling Concepts in the Humanities:
A Rough Guide, 95n16
Trinity and ‘artistic triangle’, relation
between, 138
Hindu trinity, 138
Tupsy-Turvy, 200
Types of the Scandinavian Medieval Ballad
(TSB), The, 110n15
Typoésie, 186n16
Ugreši´c, Dubravka, 187–98
see also Museum of Unconditional
Surrender, The
Ulysses, 81
Understanding Media: The Extensions of
Man, 40n6, , 43n29, 47n51, 99–101,
109n2, 109n8, 239–40, 251n8,
251n10, 251n12, 252n29, 252n32,
252n37
Urichio, W., 251n15
Valéry, P., 215
Vandekeybus, W., 56
van Leeuwen, T., 14, 40n8, 47n53
Veivo, H., 95n10
Venuti, L., 172n18, 173n22
Verlaine, P., 215, 216, 217
vertigo of cinema media, 214–15
Vertigo, 215
Video: The Reﬂexive Medium, 44n35
Világoskamra, 197n19, 197n22, 197n27,
197n34, 198n38
virtual reality, 90
virtual space notion, 20
virtual time notion, 20–1, 43n23
Visible Language, 185n1, 185n15
visual apostrophes, 6, 124–34
see also Lettrism, visual apostrophes in
Visual Thinking, 42n18
visuality, 26, 37, 47n55, 125, 129, 199,
200, 220
Vitruvian Man, 139
Vivre sa vie, 214
Voßkamp, W., 65n7
Vom Klang der Bilder, 172n4
von Trier, L., 61
Voous, K. H., 122n5
Vos, E., 67n24
Wagner, P., 124, 127, 132n1, 133n20,
151, 161n3
Walsh, S., 174n37
Waltz, S., 57, 58, 62
Walzel, O., 241
wandering phenomena, 75
Wasp Factory, The, 228
Weingart, B., 65n7
Weinrich, H., 215, 222n13
Welle, A., 44n35
Wenders, W., 192
What do PicturesWant? The Lives and
Loves of Images, 43n30
What is Cinema?, 197n21, 197n25
What is Television?, 251n15
White Lily, 40n5, 81, 86–9
Why Birds Sing, 122n16
Wiberg, H., 115, 116, 122n18
Wild, G., 251n11
William, W. P., 150, 161, 198n41
Winterbottom, M., 200
Wirkungsgeschichte, 70
Wittgenstein, L., 234


── PAGE 58 ──
PROOF
270
Index
Wolf, W., 28, 40n3, 41n10, 44n33,
45n40, 45n42, 56, 57, 65n3, 66n17,
66n18, 67n24, 67n26, 72, 80n14,
121n2, 160, 162n32, 172n9,
173n28, 206, 226, 227, 228, 229,
230, 235n8, 235n15, 250n1
Women, Fire, and Dangerous Things: What
Categories Reveal About the Mind,
161n6
Wonderful Life: The Burgess Shale and the
Nature of History, 123n32
Woodcock, M. W., 121n3
Word and Music Studies: Deﬁning the Field,
80n15
Word and Music Studies: Essays in Honor of
Steven Paul Scher on Cultural Identity
and the Musical Stage, 172n9
words
nothing with words, getting, 129–32
see also Lettrism, visual apostrophes in
Words and Images on the Screen: Language,
Literature, Moving Pictures, 221n6
Words and Pictures: On the Literal and the
Symbolic in the Illustration of a Text,
162n13
World History of the Dance, 110n16
Worton, M., 162n27
Writing and Filming the Painting: Ekphrasis
in Literature and Film, 221n10
‘writing nothingness’, 129
Yao, S. G., 172n14
Zara, E., 91, 124
Zeitschrift für Französische Sprache und
Literatur, 67n29
Zetterström, D., 122n3
Zielinski, S., 251n6
Zohn, H., 172n18
Zola, E., 222n12
