# Testing the Limits
# Source: Fjellestad - 2018 - Testing the Limits.pdf
# BibTeX key: fjellestad_testing_2018
# Zotero dir: 3109
# Extracted chars: 62689
# Format: PDF
============================================================

── PAGE 1 ──
Testing the Limits:
Leanne Shapton’s Ekphrastic Assemblage
Danuta Fjellestad
Uppsala University
Abstract
It is common to claim that the recent surge in scholarship on ekphrasis
has been stimulated by the pervasive presence of the image in what is broadly — if
vaguely — referred to as “new media.” However, also in the “old” medium of print and
its primary embodiment, the codex, images now circulate with unparalleled intensity.
The rich presence of images in contemporary fiction galvanizes anew the question of
ekphrastic practices and word-image interactions: what is the “visual-textual” contract
in the case of novels in which images are reproduced? What patterns of mobility are
there between image and text? How exactly does the narrative engage with the image
that is embedded in it? These questions inform my analysis of how ekphrasis is reshaped
in a highly unorthodox novel, Important Artifacts and Personal Property from the Collection of
Lenore Doolan and Harold Morris, Including Books, Street Fashion, and Jewelry (2009) by Leanne
Shapton. Accentuating its own visuality, the novel systematically sets words against the
reproduced pictures, playfully testing the limits of ekphrasis. Above all, Important Arti-
facts raises the question of the logic that binds the succession of images and the related
ekphrastic moments. My reading is inspired by Liliane Louvel’s (2011) concept of a
“picture gallery novel,” Tamar Yacobi’s (2013) work on “double exposure,” and Emma
Kafalenos’s (2012) concern with narrativization of sequences of images. I propose to
supplement their work with the concept of assemblage as a productive way of speaking
about “pictured” ekphrasis.
Keywords
ekphrastic assemblage, pictured ekphrasis, pictured gallery novels, Leanne
Shapton
Poetics Today 39:2 ( June 2018 )
DOI 10.1215/03335372-4324493
q 2018 by Porter Institute for Poetics and Semiotics
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/337/528900/0390337.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 2 ──
The Rise and Challenges of “Pictured” Ekphrasis
Not all that long ago ekphrasis, this “maddeningly elusive and endlessly tempt-
ing subject” (Krieger 1967: xiv), appeared—at least to the fashion-sensitive
academic crowd—to be a somewhat archaic, perhaps even rusty, if not a
bit moth-eaten concept, even if ekphrasis did of course have its circle of
committed scholars and important work was undeniably produced. Today
ekphrasis is enjoying an unprecedented resurgence of critical interest, as
Renate Brosch states in the introduction to this very issue of Poetic Today
(see also Clu¨ver 1997: 22; Karastathi 2015: 92; Scott 1994: 404). Undoubtedly
part and parcel of what W. J. T. Mitchell (1994: 13) has dubbed “the pictorial
turn,” ekphrastic studies, I believe, finds a special challenge in recent literary
developments, which simultaneously bolster and contest the unprecedented
cultural dominance of images. One such development is the extraordinary
rise of “art thriller” novels in which a real or imagined work of art or artist
interlocks with secrets, fraud, crime, or conspiracy. Who has not heard of—if
not read—Girl with a Pearl Earring by Tracy Chevalier (1999), The Da Vinci Code
by Dan Brown (2003), or The Goldfinch by Donna Tartt (2013)? Also the so-
called museum poem, that is, an ekphrastic poem accompanied by images,
has put pressure on conceptualizations of ekphrasis. Two prime examples of
this genre are the collections With a Poet’s Eye (Adams 1986) and Give Me Your
Hand (Durcan 1994). But perhaps the most compelling literary trend chal-
lenging the traditional understanding of ekphrasis as a vivid description of
a work of art is what is variously referred to as the hybrid, intermedial, or
multimodal novel (cf. Gibbons 2012; Hallet 2009; Nørgaard 2010; Page
2010 Sadokierski 2010).1 Just as in museum poems, in novels such as Mark
Danielewski’s House of Leaves (2000), Jonathan Safran Foer’s Extremely Loud and
Incredibly Close (2005), or Zachary Thomas Dodson’s Bats of the Republic (2015),
visually reproduced images intersect with the verbal text. However, while
in the museum poem the reader encounters reproductions of artworks, the
range of images in contemporary novels goes far beyond works of art to
include photographs, maps, diagrams, posters, and so on.2 Importantly, in
1. Defining ekphrasis has been at the center of intensive debates for a long time. Spitzer (1955:
218) defines ekphrasis as “the description of an objet d’art by medium of the word”; Krieger
(1967: 5) as “the imitation in literature of a work of plastic art”; Heffernan (1993: 3) as “a verbal
representation of a visual representation.” Critical deliberations as to the virtues and short-
comings of these (and many other) definitions are not likely to abate any time soon. For dis-
cussions about the various ways in which ekphrasis has been defined see, for instance, Heffernan
(1993), Mitchell (1994), Wagner (1996), and Yacobi (2013).
2. In the closing comments of his seminal essay on ekphrastic poetics, W. J. T. Mitchell (1994:
181) catalogs such kinds of visual representation as “photography, maps, diagrams, movies,
theatrical spectacles” as energizing ekphrastics. Clu¨ver (1997: 26) proposes that artifacts such
as posters, photographs, architecture, music, and nonnarrative dance are legitimate sites of
338
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/337/528900/0390337.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 3 ──
the novels I am concerned that the reader/viewer is likely to encounter
multiple visual inserts. How exactly does the narrative engage with the im-
ages that are embedded in it? How does the text justify its hospitality to the
presence of images? What is the “visual-textual” contract that is established?
If the presence of individual images is narratively justified, what is, then, the
rationale for the images as a whole? These and similar questions are relevant
for any novel with multiple instances of “pictured” ekphrasis.3 In what follows
I focus on a book which, while not unique in offering verbal-visual doublets,
fashions pictured ekphrasis in particularly provocative ways: Important Artifacts
and Personal Property from the Collection of Lenore Doolan and Harold Morris, Including
Books, Street Fashion, and Jewelry (2009) by Leanne Shapton. To signal the broad
array of pictured ekphrasis and to substantiate my claims about assemblage,
I briefly discuss two novels which are less extreme but no less engaging than
Shapton’s: Steve Martin’s An Object of Beauty (2004) and Ransom Riggs’s Miss
Peregrine’s Home for Peculiar Children (2011). By systematically pointing to im-
ages’ materiality, all three draw attention to what has been of marginal
interest to ekphrasis. Pitting ekphrasis against the reproduced image, these
novels contest the claim that under the pressure of new media, we are witness-
ing “an inversion of the classical device of ekphrasis . . . Today . . . images are
given the task . . . of explaining words, rather than the reverse” (Bolter 1996:
264). Coupling ekphrasis with reproductions of images, these novels raise the
question of the logic informing the assembly of visual inserts.
My analysis of ekphrasis in Shapton’s novel as well as the other two texts is
broadly framed by and in dialogue with Liliane Louvel’s (2011) concept of a
“picture gallery novel,” Tamar Yacobi’s (2013) work on “double exposure,”
and Emma Kafalenos’s (2012) concern with narrativization of sequences of
images. A picture gallery novel, Louvel (2011: 172) proposes, is a novel that is
“punctuated at intervals by the presence of a painting, a mirror, or one of
their substitutes.” Focusing on textualized images, Louvel turns to novels such
as Oscar Wilde’s The Picture of Dorian Gray (1890) and Virginia Woolf’s To the
Lighthouse (1927) to investigate how the “intermittent blinking” (ibid.: 177) of
ekphrastic images participates in the creation of rhythm, reconstitutes plot,
and contributes to structure. In the pictured ekphrasis I am dealing with, the
ekphrasis. For Louvel (2011: 138) “pictorial variations of the image” include mirrors, maps,
photography, optical instruments, screens, tableaux vivants, and tapestry. There are even those
who argue that even typography “lends itself perfectly to ekphrastic . . . reading” (Antonetti
1999: 41).
3. By “pictured” ekphrasis I mean ekphrasis that is accompanied by an image, that is, the
image-plus-word variety of ekphrasis. This term complements Yacobi’s notion of “picture-less”
(or “image-less”) ekphrasis (2013: 9ff.). I want to express my gratitude to Renate Brosch for
drawing my attention to it.
Fjellestad
† Testing the Limits
339
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/337/528900/0390337.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 4 ──
narrative flow is punctuated twice: by ekphrasis and by a visually reproduced
image. The question is how exactly the visual interrupts the “neat unfolding
of the text” (ibid.: 172). By means of what logic(s) are the reproduced images
bound together, that is, how are they plotted? The twinning of ekphrasis and
reproduced image that doubly punctuates narrative resonates with Yacobi’s
ekphrastic “double exposure,” which, she writes, “brings together seemingly
unrelated artworks, often indeed to unharmonious and unexpected effect”
(2013: 4); the artworks “jointly evoked by the verbal text [have] no manifest
similarity between them to unify and explain their juxtaposition” (ibid.: 5). It
is Yacobi’s rhetoric of plurality, discord, and heterogeneity that is of impor-
tance to my discussion here. However, even if she evokes a plurality of images,
Yacobi focuses on doubles only, her object of study being a poem accom-
panied by a single image. Multiple images in novels, on the other hand, is a
phenomenon investigated by Kafalenos. Of particular pertinence here is her
analysis of Italo Calvino’s Castle of Cross Destinies (1977), a novel in which
an unnamed homodiegetic narrator generates narrative from subsets of
tarot cards, the images of which are reproduced in the margins of the book.
Narrativizing these images, Kafalenos (2012: 41) argues, “requires two inter-
related processes: supplying events and assembling events into a narrative.”
But what if the homodiegetic narrator does not “plot” the images or if the
extradiegetic narrator appears to be but a curator of images rather than
a guide to the “picture gallery,” as is the case in Shapton’s novel?
I propose that “assemblage” may be a conceptual resource for discussions
of multiple cases of pictured ekphrasis in novels. As a concept, assemblage has
three distinct provenances. In fields such as archeology or paleontology,
assemblage is the classificatory term par excellence; it simply means a group
of different artifacts (or fossils) found in association with one another. In
human sciences assemblage has gained new traction thanks to the work of
Manuel DeLanda, who, building upon Gilles Deleuze and Fe´lix Guattari’s
comments in A Thousand Plateaus (1987), undertakes to develop a robust theory
of assemblage in his A New Philosophy of Society: Assemblage Theory and Social
Complexity (2006).4 In art criticism the use of the concept predates its recent
sociological currency: it was popularized through its use in the title of the
1961 exhibition, “The Art of Assemblage,” mounted by the Museum of
Modern Art in New York, where it referred to all forms of composite art
and modes of juxtaposition, but in particular signaled a position between
the broader term of collage and the narrow one of construction (Elderfield
1992: 7).
4. For a useful introduction to the rise of the concept of assemblage see Marcus and Saka (2006).
340
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/337/528900/0390337.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 5 ──
Whatever specific work the concept of assemblage is expected to do in the
various disciplines in which it circulates, it is employed because it challenges
thinking in terms of organic wholes, emphasizes temporary configurations of
relationships among heterogeneous entities, evokes materiality, and draws
attention to processes of coming-together. An object (image) can be taken out
of a given ensemble, and transferred to another, its meaning emerging
through a new set of relationships. Finding the notion of assemblage highly
suggestive, but attempting neither to transfer any single theory of assemblage
to the study of ekphrasis nor to use assemblage as a strict analytical concept,
I put it to work in my analysis to signal the process of verbal aggregation of
visual objects, and the way they are brought together into a constellation
without any single organizing principle.
Shapton’s Ensemble of Faux Catalog Captions and Images
Shapton’s ingenious novel playfully tests the limits and powers of ekphrasis
through an assemblage of captioned photographs in the manner of an auc-
tion catalog.5 The mimicry starts with the cover: the long title provides the
names of the two owners of the objects to be auctioned, Lenore Doolan and
Harold Morris, the date and place of the sale (February 14, 2009, New York),
as well as the name of the (fictional) auction house (Strachan & Quinn), but
the author’s name is nowhere to be found. Inside, the pages imitate the look
of an auction catalog as well: black-and-white numbered photographs are
accompanied by captions that identify each “lot” and provide information
about provenance, condition, size, and estimated price of the object up for
auction. However, the items to be auctioned are a far cry from artworks; up
for sale are everyday objects such as clothes, kitchen utensils, sports equip-
ment, CDs, books, postcards and letters, handwritten notes, and a broad
variety of bric-a-brac from ceramic figurines to restaurant menus and for-
tune-cookie messages. This, in a word, is not the Sotheby’s fine arts sale; its
affinity is with an estate sale or—given that many of the items are little more
than detritus—an even less glamorous garage sale.
The text that accompanies each image follows the same basic formula and
layout. For instance, a photograph of a knife, accompanied by number 1057,
is presented as follows (Shapton 2009: 23):
LOT 1057
A grapefruit knife
A wood-handled grapefruit knife. Good condition.
5. For attempts to recover the distinct history of illustrated auction see Elizabeth Pergam (2014).
Fjellestad
† Testing the Limits
341
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/337/528900/0390337.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 6 ──
61=2 in. in length.
$10 – 20
Similarly, number 1180 links an image of a camera and this entry (ibid.: 67):
LOT 1180
A Hasselblad camera
A Hasselblad 500 C/M single-lens reflex medium-format camera. Used, in
good condition. Given by Morris to Doolan, Christmas 2004.
$400– 500
While the above examples represent the standard formula used throughout
the novel for the 331 lots (numbered 1001 through 1332, a few of the lots listed
as “withdrawn”), a majority of the skeletal descriptions are expanded with
snippets of additional information. Most often the reader is presented with
fragments of communication between Doolan and Morris or with the notes
the characters purportedly scrawled to themselves. Such messages, rendered
in the captions in italics, are either an integral part of a given lot that contains
other objects, or constitute a lot all by themselves. Let me give a couple of
typical examples (ibid.: 57 and 66):
LOT 1148
Munro, Alice
Lives of Girls and Women, paperback (Vintage, 2001). Well-used condition, cover is
torn. Laid in is a note from Morris to Doolan. Reads in part: “I think you’re overreacting.
I am sorry to have had to miss dinner, truly sorry, and I should have called yes, but it was a work
party. Please understand, these functions are boringly important . . . ” Dimensions vary.
$10–15
LOT 1176
A handwritten note
A Chase Manhattan withdrawal receipt. On reverse in Morris’s script is written,
“Do you still want a boyfriend? ” beneath which is written, in Doolan’s script, “Yes, I want
a boyfriend with blue eyes,” followed by, in Morris’s script, “And I want an unpredictable
girlfriend.” 53=4 £ 31=4 in.
$10–20
Occasionally, in smaller font, a note is appended at the end of the caption
(ibid.: 92):
LOT 1232
A brown mug
A broken brown glazed mug stamped “Brickett Davda Made in England” on base.
$5–7
Included in lot is a note handwritten by Doolan. Reads: “H I’m so sorry, I know this
was your favorite. Will get it fixed, I promise.”
342
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/337/528900/0390337.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 7 ──
Such “expanded” captions provide prompts for the reader to see the col-
lected lots as repositories of a relationship. Scrutinizing the sales items, close-
reading the captions, and identifying resonances and discrepancies between
the images and their verbal representations is the condition for uncovering
the story buried in the discrete lots. Basically, this is a quintessential drama of
a love affair gone sour. A snapshot image of Lenore Doolan and a passport
photograph of Harold Morris (itemized as lots 1001 and 1002, respectively)
open the novel. We learn that Lenore Doolan, a Canadian, age twenty-six,
writes a food column for the New York Times; Harold “Hal” Morris, an Eng-
lishman, age thirty-nine, is a globetrotting commercial photographer. The
two first meet at a Halloween party in 2002, he dressed as Harry Houdini (an
early nineteenth-century illusionist and stunt performer famous for sensa-
tional escape acts), and she as Lizzie Borden (a late nineteenth-century Amer-
ican woman accused of murdering her father and stepmother), as we learn
from the caption to lot 1005, which is the first photograph in which Morris
and Doolan are featured together. They fall in love and eventually decide to
live together. Morris travels widely on a variety of assignments; Doolan is
promoted in her job. He drinks a lot and forgets dinner parties or birthdays;
she becomes increasingly frustrated with his lack of commitment, her violent
outbursts of anger scaring him. Gifts are exchanged as tokens of affection
or in order to patch up the relationship. A constellation of artifacts that are
Morris’s gifts to Doolan (a Herme`s beach towel and a watch of the same
make, an Elsa Schiaparelli astrakhan coat, allegedly once owned by Maria
Callas, a Hasselblad vintage camera, etc.) bespeak his generosity as a suitor;
hers may be more modest gifts, like handmade cards or homemade meals,
but they carefully mark anniversaries and holidays. There are hints about the
presence of other lovers in Morris’s and Doolan’s lives. There is a likelihood
of pregnancy. The initially passionate relationship reaches a point beyond
repair, and in 2006 the couple breaks up. Three years later—ironically
enough on Valentine’s Day—Doolan’s and Morris’s personal property is
to be auctioned.
In repurposing the genre of auction catalog to tell an archetypal story
about an unhappy love affair, Shapton sparks afresh a number of questions
about the function of objects in our lives. That personal possessions reveal our
taste is surely a truism; that memories are lodged in objects is equally well
known. But what turns detritus into precious mementos and makes trivia
bearers of affections, anxieties, fears, and hopes? What is the monetary value
of emotionally precious objects, that is, how is the sentimental worth of
commodities to be priced? How do gadgets guard or reveal our most intimate
secrets? If our lives can be told through things, then perhaps our lives are but
Fjellestad
† Testing the Limits
343
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/337/528900/0390337.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 8 ──
repositories of things.6 Shapton’s novel urges such questions with particular
gravity and poignancy exactly because of the systematic use of a formulaic
way to present the images, that is, of ekphrasis.
Of course one might ask if we are actually dealing with ekphrasis at all.
After all, what we encounter in Important Artifacts is definitely not “the imita-
tion in literature of a work of plastic art” as Krieger (1967: 5) would have it;
nor is it “a verbal re-presentation of visual art,” as Yacobi (2013: 2–3) pro-
poses. The “art” part of these definitions of ekphrasis presents a problem, the
lackluster photographs in Shapton’s novel depicting quotidian objects, not
artworks. But to put forward such an objection is to disregard the fact that
Shapton uses the format of the auction catalog as a ruse, that the images
function within the context of a novel, an aesthetic artifact that “denatu-
ralizes” the photograph’s indexical relationship to reality and, by extension,
the object depicted by it. However, denaturalization does not mean erasure:
when photographic images are embedded in a fictional world, ambiguity and
confusion flare up as the documentary and the fictional clash.7
As is the case with the “art” part of ekphrasis, so the verbal representation
part may also appear to be problematic in Important Artifacts. Although it has
been argued that titles and captions belong to the domain of ekphrasis (cf.
Scott 1994 or Clu¨ver 1999), the objection may be raised that Clu¨ver and
others meant captions in art auction catalogs, not in the catalog for a garage
sale.8 Moreover, in book-size catalogs of auction houses such as Sotheby’s or
Christie’s, a short formal presentation of each item is usually enhanced by an
interpretive text and, often, a bibliography, while the captions in Shapton’s
novel are strikingly skeletal and perfunctory. This, obviously, is deliberate:
disguising her novel as a sales catalog in which images are (seemingly) of
primary importance, Shapton, I want to argue, slyly takes to its extreme the
ancient premise of ekphrasis as verbally ennobling the visual. In other words,
Important Artifacts may be read as (mockingly) enacting a paragonal or antag-
onistic encounter between the verbal and the visual. But of course Shapton’s
ekphrastic experiment is more complex.
6. Shapton’s novel can be productively read through the concerns of so-called thing theory,
which focuses on our enmeshment with the world of things; see in particular Brown (2003,
2015).
7. The relation between photography and literature has been the subject of numerous studies.
Of these, I would like to mention just two foundational volumes, Rabb’s (1995) collection of
essays and Armstrong’s (1999) investigation of the alliance between realism and photography.
8. Scott (1994: 403) proposes that “even prose catalogue descriptions or titles of artworks may
be considered ekphrasis”; according to Clu¨ver (1999: 189) ekphrasis should include “certain
types of reviews, passages in textbooks, descriptions in auction catalogues or on CD covers, and
renditions in narratives, plays, and poems.”
344
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/337/528900/0390337.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 9 ──
Like captions in art catalogs, the captions in Shapton’s novel are conveyors
of information that frames the perception of images. Take lot 1102, for
instance, which shows a set of four images of cryptic objects. The image is
made intelligible by the caption, which identifies the obscure objects as “vari-
ous pieces of beef jerky” (ibid.: 39). However, it is not beef jerky that is on sale
but Morris’s “artistic” photographs of them. There is yet another twist to the
verbal-visual transfer of information: what the reader/viewer sees is four
images, while the caption states that the lot consists of a series of twenty-
four photographs. Without the caption, the image would not only be mute
but misleading as well.
As in conventional ekphrasis that illuminates the viewer’s psychological or
inner life, in Shapton’s novel even the captions that consist of lists of objects
give access, however obliquely, to the peculiarities of the two protagonists.
Lot 1079, for instance, consists of a list of over forty items to be found in
Doolan’s cosmetics case. The expected assembly of makeup articles, cosmet-
ics, and toiletries is disrupted by an odd object: a small bottle of Heinz
ketchup. Resonating with a mention of ketchup in lot 1070, the inclusion
of the item in a traveling case turns Doolan’s peculiar taste for eating cashews
with ketchup into an obsession. The list of items in Morris’s corresponding
cosmetics travel bag (lot 1080) is dominated by an array of pharmaceuticals
such as Pepto-Bismol, Neosporin, Jarrow Ginko Biloba capsules, Echinacea
extract, Metagenics somnolin tablets, Tylenol, Dramamine, Sinex, and anti-
biotic ointment. In conjunction with Morris’s note included in lot 1090 that
reads “Valium (blue) / Xanax (white) / Cylexa (small white) / Kath” (ibid.: 35),
Doolan’s partner emerges as a man suffering from a variety of ailments,
ranging from stomach problems, motion sickness, and eczema to anxiety
and depression. Perhaps a hypochondriac, Morris is prone to supplement
prescription drugs with herbal and organic remedies.
While the captions in Important Artifacts are predominantly quite skeletal,
book lots cunningly implant narratives that expand, highlight, supplement,
or contextualize the bare-bones information supplied by ekphrasis. Lot 1258,
for instance, is identified as “self-help and relationship books” (ibid.: 99). It
consists of Erich Fromm’s The Art of Loving (1962), Helen Fisher’s Why We Love
(2004), and Steven Carter and Julia Sokol’s He’s Scared, She’s Scared (1995). The
lot in itself sends a signal about problems in the Morris-Doolan relationship as
well as a desire to repair it. Whether it is Morris, Doolan, or both of them who
explored the books is left unspecified. But the lot signifies beyond the specific
relation presented in the novel: it is a testimonial to the cultural popularity of
self-help books, the cult of self-knowledge, the persistent belief that emotions
and passions can be rationally explained, and the conviction that, given the
right tools, relationships can be revived. It is noteworthy that the three books
Fjellestad
† Testing the Limits
345
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/337/528900/0390337.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 10 ──
offer widely different, even contradictory, approaches to love, which is likely
to increase rather than assuage perplexity about this story’s central emotion.
According to Fromm, a renowned psychoanalyst and social philosopher, any
kind of love—romantic, brotherly, of oneself, or of God—is a skill that has to
be developed and requires knowledge and effort. Fisher, an anthropologist, is
interested in the biology of love and attraction; she sees romantic passion as
hardwired into our brains by millions of years of evolution. Carter and Sokol
theorize their own experiences, advancing the idea that modern men and
women are torn between the desire for intimacy and the equally intense need
for independence; hidden fears of commitment, they claim, sabotage rela-
tionships. Thus the mere listing of book titles opens up a profusion of narra-
tive possibilities in the way that intertextuality does. For all that, the caption
and the accompanying image raise questions such as: is the label “self-help
and relationship books” adequate? Why would the narrator-cum-curator
assemble these three books in a single lot? Is it significant or not that the
book lot comes after a lot that features three pairs of women’s shoes? Why are
the three books horizontally stacked, their spines facing the reader/viewer,
while all the other book lots show books in vertical positions? This may sound
like hairsplitting, but in Shapton’s novel every verbal-visual detail seems to be
invested with meaning.
Quite often, ekphrasis-triggered intertextuality is interlaced with pictorial
intervisuality. Lot 1305 may serve as an example of this verbal-visual dynam-
ics. The lot is identified as “Moore, Pamela / Chocolates for Breakfast (Long-
man’s Green and Co., 1957)” (ibid.: 120). The importance of the novel seems
to be promptly displaced by a note tucked between the book’s pages, in which
Doolan informs Morris that she suspect she may be pregnant; Morris writes
back that he needs time to think about the new situation and will call his
partner from a hotel. The note has climactic significance, yet it is its “vehicle,”
Moore’s book, that constitutes the lot. The tension between the novel and the
notes is countered by striking similarities between the stories they tell. First
published in 1956, Chocolates for Breakfast is an account of a young woman
learning to navigate a world of sexuality and self-destructive behavior. Moore’s
depiction of a love affair between a young woman and a much older man
echoes Shapton’s, as do the themes of alcoholism, isolation, depression, sui-
cidal thoughts, loneliness, secrets, and the difficulty of being a woman. An
instantaneous international sensation, a scandal even, Moore’s novel violates
the taboo on explicit depiction of same-sex sexuality, while Important Artifacts
defies novelistic conventions. This narrative mise-en-abıˆme has its visual coun-
terpart. Doolan’s note is only partly sticking out of Moore’s book, which
seems to enfold, anchor, and protect it. The cover of the novel features the
upper torso of a young woman sitting at a table, a glass of wine in her hand.
346
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/337/528900/0390337.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 11 ──
Lost in thought, the figure is poignantly lonely. This drawing of the female
figure reverberates with the photographs of Doolan holding wine glasses,
looking forlorn even when surrounded by others. In lot 1305, as in many
other lots, pictured ekphrasis doubles down on itself, and Important Artifacts is
turned into both an echo chamber and a hall of mirrors.
But such intricate verbal-visual interactions emerge only gradually, Shap-
ton’s book thrusting the reader into a world of images with such abandon that
at first one may wonder if the book is a novel at all. With one exception, every
single page is dominated by pictures. Occasionally, a single image monopo-
lizes almost the whole space of a given page; most often there are several
pictures on a page, the visual congestion of the page enhanced by the fact that
a single picture may represent several items or may feature other pictorial
objects such as postcards or photographs. The dominance of the visual seems
to be augmented by the strategic use of modest-size fonts in captions and by
page layout—the photographs are often placed at the top of the page or in left-
hand columns, so that the reader accesses the pictures first. Although text and
image are systematically linked together via numbers, the captions are seldom
placed in close proximity to the pictures, which are haphazardly arranged, so
to tie the image and the word together, the reader’s gaze must crisscross the
page.9 But this primacy of the visual turns out to be just another ruse.
While the two media do indeed work together to co-create the intricate
tapestry of the love affair, ultimately the verbal upstages the visual. In the
“grapefruit knife” example given above, the relation may appear symmetri-
cal, but the caption in fact conveys much more information than the picture:
it identifies the knife as a grapefruit knife, its handle as made of wood, and
specifies its condition and its size. In fact, all the captions provide information
not rendered by photographic images, such as color, size, material or, in
many cases, the brand of the merchandise. Lot 1284 (ibid.: 112–13), for in-
stance, consists of eighteen bras, each bra identified by its color (black-and-
yellow, red, red-and-white, etc.), material (nylon, cotton, lace, spandex), and
brand (Cosabella, Chantal Thomass, Burberry, Huit), none of which can be
gleaned from the images. Filled with merchandise, the world of Important
Artifacts uses brand names such as Prada, Herme`s, Dior, Dr. Hauschka, or
Helmut Lang in a way similar to how references to a Picasso, a Rembrandt,
or a Warhol function in the world of high art catalogs: both a Picasso and a
Dior bespeak privilege, luxury, and aesthetic superiority.
9. The physical positioning of the images in relation to the text is important, because it mobi-
lizes the gaze of the reader and signals reading paths. On how images and text are woven
together in Shapton’s novel, see Fjellestad (2015).
Fjellestad
† Testing the Limits
347
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/337/528900/0390337.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 12 ──
In some cases the captions identify the objects, but no pictures are linked to
them. Such “not illustrated” lots are mostly printouts of e-mails and paper
clippings whose contents are (at least partly) transcribed. Lot 1062 (ibid.: 24),
for instance, identified as “a handwritten note,” is described as follows: “A
note on a Post-it dated May 10, 2003. Reads: ‘Lenore, I’m sorry we fought last
night. I will give you a call from my hotel. H x.’ 3 £ 3 in. Not illustrated. $10–20.”
Occasionally, visually available information either clashes with the verbal, or
the image is incomprehensible without the caption, as is the case of lot 1102,
discussed above. Sometimes hardly anything is visually available. Lot 1105
is one of the particularly teasing examples in which the verbal is caught in
a game of hide-and-seek. The image is that of a piece of folded paper. The
caption reads (ibid.: 41):
LOT 1105
A handwritten list
A list on yellow foolscap paper in Doolan’s hand. Reads: “Pros: Fun, good sex,
different world, travel, art / Cons: Depressive — drinking? Celebrity fixation, bad breath, always
traveling, doesn’t care about food, withholding.” Paper is folded in halffive times. 14 £ 81=2 in.
$10–15
The only piece of information corroborated by the picture is that a piece of
paper is folded, but not how many times, what type of paper it is, that it
contains a list, and so on. The image, that is, withholds what the text provides,
this blatant disjunction asserting the powers of ekphrasis to turn even the most
mundane object into an important artifact and thus a (faux) marketable
commodity.
While traditionally ekphrasis arrests the narrative flow, in Shapton’s novel
it often includes signals of temporality: boarding passes for a flight to Venice,
laid in a Daphne du Maurier novel (lot 1077; ibid.: 29), are dated June 19,
2003; an invitation to a Halloween party (lot 1106; ibid.: 41) bears the date
October 31, 2003. Sometimes the temporal unfolding of events is indicated
by proxy. Lot 1255 (ibid.: 99), for example, consists of a group of business
cards, on one of which the name Vino Enoteca is given, the person identified
as “Couples Therapist.”10 That the couple considered seeking professional
help some time in 2005 is implied by the lot’s positioning between two dated
lots: lot 1254 (ibid.: 98) is a handwritten letter dated March 19, 2005, and lot
1256 (ibid.: 99) is a newspaper clipping from September 13, 2005. Ekphrastic
comments on wear or damage also serve to give the objects a temporal
dimension; the images themselves only occasionally do so, through the “vin-
10. I want to thank Elisabeth Herion Sarafidis for her marvelous comments on humor in
Shapton’s novel; “Vino Enoteca” (wine cellar and shop) is a Pynchonesque type of name for
a therapist, especially given the fact that Morris is a heavy drinker.
348
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/337/528900/0390337.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 13 ──
tage” look of some clothing items or reproductions of book covers.11 Each
of the discrete visual units/lots is aimed at potential bidders, but the whole
sequence requires the reader to weave together snippets of verbal informa-
tion into a narrative. In this respect, Important Artifacts is quite different from
Calvino’s novel, in which sequences of images are narrativized by a homo-
diegetic narrator (Kafalenos 2012).
The reader of Calvino’s novel watches the character-narrator put together
a story from subsets of images that all belong to the same tarot pack; the
reader/viewer of Shapton’s novel is faced with the task of himself or herself
fitting together an assembly of images dizzying in their heterogeneity. Repeat-
edly, captions draw the reader’s/viewer’s attention to the fact that the lots
consist of a series, a collection, or a group of items. Sometimes the items are
brought together by such generic denominators as “maps,” “tea towels,” or
“vintage dresses”; often, the lots consist of a haphazard assembly of things.
The caption of lot 1302 (ibid.: 118), for instance, informs us that we are deal-
ing with “a group of sale finds” that includes “a vintage hand-knit green-wool
zippered sweater, child size, ca. 1940. A rainbow necklace. A VHS copy of
Annie Hall. An oversize plastic die. A heart-shaped brooch.” What can each
item tell us about the characters? What can the lot as a whole tell us about
the protagonists’ habits: did they both—or one of them—go to sales on a
regular basis? Were the objects purchased on one and the same occasion or
at different sales? If the first was the case, were the items sold together as a
group or as separate items? Who is the agent deciding on the constellation
of objects: some earlier owner/seller? the curator of the auction? Like
objects found at an archeological site, the pictured objects sited/sighted
in the novel-cum-auction catalog trigger questions but withhold definite
answers; only partial answers may be teased out when objects are viewed
in relation with other objects.
That banal everyday objects are worthy of attention at all, that they are
important artifacts, that they have value is mediated by ekphrasis. Ekphrasis
reanimates everyday detritus and turns it into something desirable and mean-
ingful. More than that: to be narrativized, the images need words. This is an
ancient premise of ekphrasis on which Important Artifacts builds while simul-
taneously delighting in the richness of pictures. In its employment of pictured
ekphrasis Shapton’s text tests novelistic boundaries, ushering in, perhaps, a
new type of narrative: the ekphrastic novel.
11. Hal and Lenore give each other numerous first editions of books; without the captions, few
readers are likely to date the images of the covers.
Fjellestad
† Testing the Limits
349
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/337/528900/0390337.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 14 ──
“Pictured” Gallery Novels
I want to turn now to two less eccentric novels to put Shapton’s refashioning
of ekphrasis in the broader context of contemporary fiction’s wide-ranging
preoccupation with word-image interactions, and to substantiate my prop-
osition that assemblage may be a productive concept for ekphrastics. Both
in Steve Martin’s An Object of Beauty (2004) and in Ransom Riggs’s Miss
Peregrine’s Home for Peculiar Children (2011) bewitching images visually puncture
the narrative, compelling the reader to ponder the function of the visual
assembly and the logic that structures it. In both novels ekphrasis emphasizes
images’ materiality and heterogeneity, albeit in different ways. In both, im-
ages are endowed with powers of agency.
Set in auction houses, galleries, and museums, An Object of Beauty is highly
hospitable to verbal representations of works of art, that is, to ekphrasis.
Indeed, the novel teems with traditional as well as less common variants of
ekphrasis. The already rich tapestry of ekphrases is made even richer (and
more complicated) by the presence of twenty-two attention-grabbing full-
color reproductions of well-known artworks. While integral to the plot, themes,
and characterization, the visual inserts undercut the narrative’s obsession
with the physical properties of artworks. Artworks, Martin reminds the read-
er again and again, are tangible objects, assembled from a variety of materials
such as paper, cardboard, canvas, silk, porcelain, rusted Corten steel, or felt.
Their size matters as well: the characters never fail to register, for instance,
that Giorgio Morandi’s still lives are “no bigger than a tea tray” (Martin 2010
97), or the “monumental size” of John Singleton Copley’s Watson and the Shark
(ibid.: 51). From colossal (Richard Serra’s Betwixt the Torus and the Sphere) to
miniscule (Tom Friedman’s self-portrait carved on an aspirin), the size of the
artworks’ “bodies” impacts the characters’ response to them. Moreover,
frames, tangible objects in themselves, shape the characters’ emotional and
aesthetic reception of works of art. When a small but “sensational” painting
by Milton Avery is brought to Sotheby’s, the reader is informed that its frame
is “so ghastly” that it needs to be screened out when the picture is looked at
(ibid.: 23); reframed, the same Avery instead attracts the buyers’ attention,
wearing “its new frame like a bridal gown” (ibid.: 33). The physical coordi-
nates of paintings, we are told, are value-bearers; factoring in “condition,
size, and subject matter” (ibid.: 16) is necessary to arrive at an estimate of the
artwork’s monetary worth. In positing an inseparable relation between art’s
intangible essence and its material substance, the novel twins an aesthetic
with an economic eye. While this twinning is indisputably part of Martin’s
critique—satire even—of the vanities of the art market, it remakes ekphrastic
tradition by centralizing what has traditionally been of marginal interest to it.
350
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/337/528900/0390337.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 15 ──
However, this narrative engagement with frames is not reflected in the
reproductions, nor is the ekphrastic insistence on the significance of artworks’
size corroborated by the pictures. The novel’s reader/viewer sees “frame-
less” images; the Still Life by Morandi, in reality tiny (12 by 16 inches), appears
to be bigger than the 6 feet 3.87 inches by 58 inches image of Willem de
Kooning’s Woman I. Least of all are the artworks’ materials available to the
eye of the reader/viewer. This is brought home with particular force in the
narrative when a French art collector describes a painting as a special “gou-
lash” of materials: the stretcher, wooden triangles, nails, canvas, paint, var-
nish, frame as well as labels and scribbles enable the “miracle” of the picture
to “reveal” itself:
Well, first, ephemera and notations on the back of the canvas. Labels indicate
gallery shows, museum shows, footprints in the snow, so to speak. Then pencil
scribbles on the stretcher, usually by the artist, usually a title or date. Next the
stretcher itself. Pine or something. Wooden triangles in the corners so the picture
can be tapped tighter when the canvas becomes loose. Nails in the wood securing
the picture to the stretcher. Next, a canvas: linen, muslin, sometimes a panel; then
the gesso— a primary coat, always white. A layer of underpaint, usually a pastel
color, then, the miracle, where the secrets are: the paint itself, swished around,
roughly, gently, layer on layer, thick or thin, not more than a quarter of an inch
ever — God can happen in that quarter of an inch — the occasional brush hair left
embedded, colors mixed over each other, tones showing through, sometimes the
weave of the linen revealing itself. The signature on top of the entire goulash. Then
varnish is swabbed over the whole. Finally, the frame, translucent gilt or carved
wood. The whole thing is done. (ibid.: 81)
It is noteworthy that the speaker verbally assembles the various material
aspects of a painting in cadences and rhythms with strong erotic undertones:
the short opening sentences give way to sentence fragments, the rhythm of
which resonates with sexual arousal to be followed by a long, climactic, sen-
tence full of adjectives, adverbs, and noun phrases, the commas urging the
reader to go on in an almost breathless way, the idiom of “miracle,” “secrets,”
“God” rupturing the focus on material properties and transporting the
reader into the realm of the sublime. Then comes a return to sentence frag-
ments and the final short sentence that brings the description to its resolution.
Yet here, as elsewhere in the novel, the emphasis is on what is invisible to the
reader/viewer. The reader’s experience of the images is thus dissonant with
that of the characters; this aspect of artworks’ materiality is transferable
linguistically but not visually.
Yet even if the reproductions deceive the reader about the artworks’
material, size, or frame, they do capture his or her eyes, arresting the flow
of reading, their “intermittent blinking” (Louvel 2011: 177) artfully enticing
Fjellestad
† Testing the Limits
351
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/337/528900/0390337.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 16 ──
the reader/viewer to look for the design that may bring them together, to
weave “the thread between the various scenes,” to inscribe “a temporality in-
between the fixity of the paintings,” and to (re)reconstruct a plot (ibid.: 172).
Nevertheless, no “organic” principle can be found to bring the visual inserts
together; there is no clear narrative motivation for the constellation of im-
ages; the images cannot be grouped together under the rubric of type, genre,
period, or any other category conventionally governing the arrangement of
artworks. Instead, we are offered an assemblage of heterogeneous images
interacting with each other in its temporary site, the book.
While An Object of Beauty focuses on the traditional objects of ekphrasis,
artworks, Ransom Riggs’s novel Miss Peregrine’s Home for Peculiar Children (2011)
makes extensive use of vintage photographs.12 The narrator-protagonist
weaves over forty antique-looking photographic images into the story of
his adventures, repeatedly drawing the reader’s attention to their presence,
registering his emotional response to them, and offering prompts as to what
to look at. His ekphrastic engagement with the photographs varies from a
mere reference to a relatively detailed description. For instance, one of the
photographs, the narrator tells us, features “a pair of freakish twins . . .
dressed in the weirdest costumes” he has ever seen (Riggs 2011: 45). The
verbal information is barely enough to identify the picture that the narrator
refers to. Even his second ekphrastic presentation of the twins as “two masked
ruffle-collared kids who seemed to be feeding each other a coil of ribbon”
(ibid.: 111) offers little detail; in both cases, the photographic image stands in
lieu of the traditional “vivid description.” When more extended descriptions
are offered, the photographic images tend to deviate from them. This is, for
instance, how the protagonist describes his meeting with the eponymous Miss
Peregrine: “On an elaborate Persian rug, in a high-backed chair, a distin-
guished-looking ladysat knitting. She was dressedheadtotoe in black, her hair
pinned in a perfectly round knot atop her head, with lace gloves and a high-
collared blouse fastened tightly at her throat” (ibid.: 142). The image next to
this description corroborates few (if any) of the details the narrator mentions:
the woman is indeed dressed in black from head to toe and her blouse is
fastened tightly at the throat, but she is standing in front of a house, holding
an umbrella, her hands covered by heavy gloves and her hair by a hat with a
12. A note at the end of Riggs’s book informs the reader that all the pictures are authentic and,
mostly, reproduced in an unaltered state. The photographs, we read, “were lent from the
personal archives of ten collectors, people who have spent years and countless hours hunting
through giant bins of unsorted snapshots at flea markets and antiques malls and yard sales to
find a transcendent few, rescuing images of historical significance and arresting beauty from
obscurity — and, most likely, the dump” (2011: 350).
352
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/337/528900/0390337.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 17 ──
veil. Only the physical proximity of the description and the photograph
encourages the reader to take a leap of faith and link the two.
The photographs, in other words, cannot be reduced to a merely illustra-
tive or ornamental function but offer layers of visual experience that interact
with the verbal narrative in highly complex ways. They also interact with
each other by virtue of their medial “otherness” from the verbal: each photo-
graph is reproduced on a separate page; each is displayed against a chocolate-
brown background, thin double white lines marking the margins of the page.
Most of the images are themselves framed by white borders typical of antique
photographs. This complex structure of frames creates the impression of the
photographs having been glued onto the pages, which makes them stand out
as material objects, “foreign” to the narrative, their proper home a family
album. At the same time, however, these doubly “orphaned” material arti-
facts (they are uncaptioned, their provenance lost to history) are reconfigured
and charged with meaning exactly because they are embedded in a verbal
narrative. Renested into the narrative, they are brought together but retain
their medial distinctiveness.
The twenty-two color reproductions of artworks in An Object of Beauty and
the over forty photographs in Miss Peregrine’s Home for Peculiar Children, inter-
spersed at various points in the narratives, visually punctuate “the symphony
of reading as a progression,” to use Louvel’s words (ibid. 2011: 174). In
Important Artifacts, on the other hand, the pictures do not so much punctuate
as orchestrate reading. In Shapton’s novel the hundreds of images do not
blink intermittently but stare fixedly at the reader, demanding a return of his
or her gaze. Rather than “picture gallery” novels, they are pictured gallery novels,
tantalizing the reader/viewer with a promise that the assembly of images can
be turned into a coherent narrative. But the promise is never kept. In neither
of the novels does the presence of (reproduced) images make ekphrasis redun-
dant; nor is there “an inversion of the classical device of ekphrasis,” that is,
images are not ubiquitously “given the task . . . of explaining words” (Bolter
1996: 264). Words and images are interconnected in knottier ways: they may
complement, contradict, enhance, augment, dislodge, or accentuate each
other.
Ekphrastic Heterogeneity as Assemblage
The variety and complexity of possible interactions between ekphrasis and an
accompanying reproduction of an artwork is one of Yacobi’s concerns. Ana-
lyzing museum poems, Yacobi argues that the availability of visual reproduc-
tions alongside their descriptions brings about “at least four interrelated
deautomatizing effects vis-a`-vis what is typical in picture-less ekphrasis”
Fjellestad
† Testing the Limits
353
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/337/528900/0390337.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 18 ──
(2013: 15). To begin with, there is no need for enargeia, a vivid description of
the visual image. Second, this minimized demand for verbalizing the visual
“leaves the museum poet free to select, combine, highlight, defocus, extend
pictorial elements at will.” Third, since all the details of the artwork are in the
visual insert, the image may become merely a starting point for the poet, the
poem “free to go its own way” into realms such as fantasy or verbal play.
Finally, the quoted image does not have to be subordinate to the verbal;
instead, it can “counter or even undermine the quoting frame’s dominance”
(ibid.: 15–17). These points are relevant for pictured ekphrasis in novels
as well, as I hope my analysis of Important Artifacts, An Object of Beauty, and
Miss Peregrine’s Home for Peculiar Children has made clear.
Yacobi’s interest in how ekphrasis functions vis-a`-vis the reproduced image
rather than what it means resonates with Deleuze and Guattari’s focus on
functions and relations. Promoting the concept of assemblage when we think
about books, for instance, they state: “We will never ask what a book means,
as signified or signifier; we will not look for anything to understand in it. We
will ask what it functions with, in connection with what other things it does or
does not transmit intensities, in which other multiplicities its own are inserted
and metamorphosed” (1987: 4). In pictured ekphrasis, words function with
and are metamorphosed by images, as Yacobi convincingly shows. However,
in contradistinction to a museum poem, in the novels I have discussed the
reader/viewer is faced with a succession of ekphrastic moments and repro-
duced images not reducible to a single logic. Such “pictured” gallery novels
function as assemblages.
While assemblage basically means “a group of objects of different or simi-
lar types found in close association with one another,” recent attempts to
think through the concept emphasize heterogeneity, materiality, exchange-
ability, and multiple functionality. What is at stake is a shift away from think-
ing in terms of singular entities toward relations. This can of course be found
in the metaphors of webs, networks, and ecologies. However, assemblage, as
DeLanda (2006: 8) points out, works against such “organismic” approaches
in which parts constitute a harmonious whole and are in turn defined entirely
by the totality of this whole. Instead, DeLanda says, “a component part of an
assemblage may be detached from it and plugged into a different assemblage
in which the interactions are different” (ibid.: 10). Importantly, the concept
of assemblage reconfigures agency as it recognizes objects’ agential powers:
they affect as much as they are affected.13
13. Several critics (cf. Hardie and Mckenzie 2007) have pointed out that the translation of the
French agencement as assemblage obfuscates the question of agency.
354
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/337/528900/0390337.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 19 ──
What I find attractive about assemblage is that it evokes the poetics of
accumulation without compromising heterogeneity. It offers a way of think-
ing about dynamic relations between ekphrasis and images: hardly ever are
images illustrations of ekphrasis; instead, they deviate from their textual
treatment and claim their own agency. Like objects found in archeological
sites, the heterogeneous images in the novels under discussion here are enfold-
ed by the narratives; they interact with one another and with the utterances
about them (the materials that they are composed of, value judgments, price
tags). Brought together by virtue of their visuality, they elicit acts of “putting
together” or “fitting” to explain their relationality. Functioning within the
context of the story, the images remind the reader that they have been lifted
from other contexts (galleries, museums, everyday life) in which they were in
different relations with different images.
The concept of assemblage, I want to point out, has occasionally been used
in literary studies. Bruce Morrissette (1979), for instance, mobilizes the term
to describe Alain Robbe-Grillet’s compositional strategy, involving the inclu-
sion of preexisting texts, not least his own. Others (Brown 2015; Kafalenos
2012) have also brought up assemblage, if only in passing. But it is Friedrich
Nietzsche’s comment about the Iliad that seems to be closest to my thinking
of constellations of pictured ekphrasis in novels. “The Iliad,” Nietzsche said,
“is no garland, but an assemblage of flowers” (quoted in Shapiro 2003: 75).
Admittedly not a new term, assemblage, I hope, can become a meaningful
addition to the conceptual apparatus of contemporary ekphrastics.
Works Cited
Adams, Pat, ed.
1986 With a Poet’s Eye: A Tate Gallery Anthology (London: Tate Gallery).
Antonetti, Martin
1999 “Typographic Ekphrasis: The Description of Typographic Forms in the Nineteenth
Century,” Word & Image 15: 41 – 53.
Armstrong, Nancy
1999 Fiction in the Age of Photography: The Legacy of British Realism (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press).
Bolter, Jay David
1996 “Ekphrasis, Virtual Reality, and the Future of Writing.” In The Future of the Book, edited
by Geoffrey Nunberg, 253 – 72 (Berkeley: University of California Press).
Brown, Bill
2003 A Sense of Things: The Object Matter of American Literature (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press).
2015 Other Things (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Clu¨ver, Claus
1997 “Ekphrasis Reconsidered: On Verbal Representations of Non-Verbal Text.” In Interart
Poetics: Essays on the Interrelations of the Arts and Media, edited by Lagerroth Ulla-Britta, Hans
Lund, and Erik Hedling, 19 – 33 (Amsterdam: Rodopi).
Fjellestad
† Testing the Limits
355
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/337/528900/0390337.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 20 ──
Clu¨ver, Claus
1999 “The Musikgedicht: Notes on an Ekphrastic Genre.” In Word and Music Studies: Defining the
Field, edited by Walter Bernhart, Steven Paul Scher, and Werner Wolf, 187 – 204 (Amster-
dam: Rodopi).
DeLanda, Manuel
2006 A New Philosophy of Society: Assemblage Theory and Social Complexity (London: Continuum).
Deleuze, Gilles, and Felix Guattari
1987 A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia, translated by Brian Massumi (Minne-
apolis: University of Minnesota Press).
Durcan, Paul
1994 Give Me Your Hand: Poems Inspired by Paintings in the National Gallery, London (London:
Macmillan and National Gallery).
Elderfield, John
1992 “Preface.” In Essays on Assemblage. Studies in Modern Art 2, edited by John Elderfield (New
York: Museum of Modern Art).
Fjellestad, Danuta
2015 “Nesting — Braiding — Weaving: Photographic Interventions in Three Contemporary
American Novels.” In Handbook of Intermediality: Literature — Image — Sound — Music, edited
by Gabriele Rippl, 193 – 218 (Berlin: De Gruyter).
Gibbons, Alison
2012 Multimodality, Cognition, and Experimental Literature (New York: Routledge).
Hallet, Wolfgang
2009 “The Multimodal Novel. The Integration of Modes and Media in Novelistic Narra-
tion.” In Narratology in the Age of Cross-disciplinary Narrative Research, edited by Sandra Heinen
and Roy Sommer, 129 – 53 (Berlin: De Gruyter).
Heffernan, James A. W.
1993 Museum of Words: The Poetics of Ekphrasis from Homer to Ashbery (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press).
Kafalenos, Emma
2012 “The Polysemy of Looking: Reading Ekphrasis alongside Images in Calvino’s Castle of
Crossed Destinies and Vargas Llosa’s In Praise of the Stepmother,” Poetics Today 22: 27 – 57.
Karastathi, Sylvia
2015 “Ekphrasis and the Novel/Narrative Fiction.” In Handbook of Intermediality: Literature —
Image — Sound — Music, edited by Gabriele Rippl, 92 – 112 (Berlin: De Gruyter).
Krieger, Murray
1967 “Ekphrasis and the Still Moment in Poetry, or Laokoo¨n Revisited.” In The Poet as Critic,
edited by F. P. W. McDowell, 3 – 25 (Evanston: Northwestern University Press).
Louvel, Liliane
2011 Poetics of the Iconotext, edited by Karen Jacobs, translated by Laurence Petit (Farnham:
Ashgate).
Marcus, George E., and Erkan Saka
2006 “Assemblage,” Theory, Culture & Society 23: 101 – 9.
Martin, Steve
2010 An Object of Beauty: A Novel (New York: Grand Central Publishing).
Mitchell, W. J. T.
1994 Picture Theory (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Morissette, Bruce
1979 Intertextual Assemblage in Robbe-Grillet from Topology to Golden Triangle (Fredericton, NB:
York Press).
Nørgaard, Nina
2009 “The Semiotics of Typography in Literary Texts: A Multimodal Approach,” Orbis
Litterarum 64: 141 – 60.
356
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/337/528900/0390337.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 21 ──
Page, Ruth
2010 “Introduction.” In New Perspectives on Narrative and Multimodality, edited by Ruth Page,
1 – 13 (London: Routledge).
Pergam, Elizabeth
2014 “Selling Pictures: The Illustrated Auction Catalogue,” Journal of Art Historiography 1:
1 – 25.
Rabb, Jane M., ed.
1995 Literature and Photography: Interactions 1840 – 1990 (Albuquerque: University of New Mex-
ico Press).
Riggs, Ransom
2011 Miss Peregrine’s Home for Peculiar Children (Philadelphia: Quirk Books).
Sadokierski, Zoe¨
2010 “Visual Writing: A Critique of Graphic Devices in Hybrid Novels, from a Visual
Communication Design Perspective.” PhD diss., University of Technology, Sydney.
Scott, F. Grant
1994 “Ekphrasis and the Picture Gallery.” In Advances in Visual Semiotics: The Semiotic Web
1992 – 93, edited by Thomas A. Sebeok and Jean Umiker-Sebeok, 403 – 21 (Berlin: De
Gruyter).
Shapiro, Gary
2003 Archaeologies of Vision: Foucault and Nietzsche on Seeing and Saying (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press).
Shapton, Leanne
2009 Important Artifacts and Personal Property from the Collection of Lenore Doolan and Harold Morris,
including Books, Street Fashion, and Jewelry (New York: Sarah Crichton Books).
Spitzer, Leo
1955 “The Ode on the Grecian Urn, or Content vs. Metagrammar,” Comparative Literature 7:
203 – 25.
Wagner, Peter
1996 “Ekphrasis, Iconotexts, and Intermediality — The State(s) of the Art(s).” In Icons —
Texts — Iconotexts: Essays on Ekphrasis and Intermediality, edited by Peter Wagner, 1 – 40 (Ber-
lin: De Gruyter).
Yacobi, Tamar
2013 “Ekphrastic Double Exposure and the Museum Book of Poetry,” Poetics Today 34:
1 – 52.
Fjellestad
† Testing the Limits
357
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/337/528900/0390337.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025
