# Ekphrasis and Digital Media
# Source: Jansson - 2018 - Ekphrasis and Digital Media.pdf
# BibTeX key: jansson_ekphrasis_2018
# Zotero dir: 3111
# Extracted chars: 54722
# Format: PDF
============================================================

── PAGE 1 ──
Ekphrasis and Digital Media
Mats Jansson
University of Gothenburg
Abstract
Digital technologies entail new possibilities and challenges for the production
and reception of ekphrasis. The ekphrastic poet is given the opportunity not only to
write a poem “describing” a work of art, but to create a multimedial artwork involving
several senses. In consequence, the recipient is no longer simply reading an ekphrastic
poem but engaged in an activity of reading, viewing, and listening, whereby ekphrasis
becomes part of a multisensory “event.” Digital “remediation” has given the ekphrastic
writer a new creative freedom to work with the visual arts. In particular, software
techniques have allowed the ekphrastic writer/artist to experiment with the kinetics
of text and image, thus developing new ways to problematize and overcome the old
dichotomy of stasis and movement within the arts. This article focuses on three
examples of computer-mediated ekphrasis that make use of the digital possibilities in
various degrees. The Swedish writer Lotta Lotass’s tetralogy Redwood (2008 – 9), Hemvist
(2009, Abode), Kraftverk (2009 – 10), and Nya Dikter (2011, New Poems), published on the
website Autor Eter, relies on ekphrasis as a mode of writing in relation to a vast number
of remediated photographs in the form of picture postcards. Edward Falco’s Chemical
Landscapes Digital Tales (2006), available on the homepage of the Electronic Literature
Organization (ELO), is a suite of image-text combinations where photograms are the
object of ekphrastic re-presentations. Accounts of the Glass Sky (2006) by M. D. Coverley
(Marjorie Luesebrink), published in ELO’s first collection of electronic literature, is
based on old black-and-white remediated photographs that are linked to ekphrastic
poems. The article shows that ekphrasis in all of these cases becomes part of a multi-
medial experience or aesthetic event that in various degrees relies on the active par-
ticipation of the reader/viewer.
Keywords
intermediality, photography, remediation, multimodality, photogram
Poetics Today 39:2 ( June 2018)
DOI 10.1215/03335372-4324468
q 2018 by Porter Institute for Poetics and Semiotics
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/299/528880/0390299.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 2 ──
Ekphrasis in a broad sense is commonly understood as a literary re-creation
of visual art, whereby the concept as such becomes “an umbrella term that
subsumes various forms of rendering the visual object into words” (Yacobi
1995: 599). In line with James Heffernan’s seminal definition (1993:3), Tamar
Yacobi, Valerie Robillard (1998: 61), and others have noted that the one
work’s representation of the world becomes the other’s re-presentation, “a
mimesis in the second degree,” as Yacobi (1995: 600) puts it, but hardly an
unproblematic one since it is fraught with semiotic, hermeneutical, and phe-
nomenological issues: the transformation of one semiotic sign system through
another; the literary interpretation of an historically situated sculptural/
pictorial work of art and its present hermeneutic application; the liter-
ary concretization of the sculptural/pictorial work of art as a possible aes-
thetic object. Without downplaying these theoretical complexities (cf.
Jansson 2016: 51–71), my aim is to examine some examples of ekphrasis
that rely on digital technologies and are made available on the computer
screen. These new technologies have indeed entailed new possibilities and
brought about new consequences for the production and reception of
ekphrasis. The ekphrastic poet is given the opportunity not only to write a
poem “describing” a work of art, but to create a multimedial artwork involv-
ing several senses. In consequence, the recipient is no longer simply reading
an ekphrastic poem but engaged in reading, viewing, and listening, thus
taking an active part in a multisensory event. Digital “remediation” has
given the ekphrastic writer a new creative freedom to work with the visual
arts. In particular, software techniques have allowed the ekphrastic writer/
artist to experiment with the kinetics of text and image, thereby developing
new ways to problematize and overcome the old dichotomy of stasis and
movement within the arts. Indeed, as Johanna Hartmann (2015: 120) has
noted, the digital age comprises new ontological and epistemological chal-
lenges for ekphrasis.
The last decades of the previous century were characterized by rapid
change and development in the cultural sphere, in which communication
technology had come to play a vital role. The personal computer and the
Internet are by now established media channels to create and convey cultural
products of an enormous variety. The computerization of the world we live in
has brought about consequences for the production, distribution, and con-
sumption of literature and has openedup opportunities for new aesthetics and
for new forms of literary works. The so-called digital age has seen the emer-
gence of various types of “electronic literature,” defined by N. Katherine
Hayles (2008: 3) as literature “generally considered to exclude print literature
that has been digitized” and “by contrast ‘digital born,’ a first-generation
digital object created on a computer and (usually) meant to be read on a
300
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/299/528880/0390299.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 3 ──
computer.” In her study of digital poetry, Maria Engberg (2007: 2) presents
a definition in agreement with Hayles and reserves the term digital poetry for
“a range of diverse poetic practices and types of poems . . . that share com-
puter technology as a medium of composition and publication.”
Jay David Bolter (1996: 265), who briefly discusses ekphrasis in the context
of new electronic technologies of representation, sees the recent expansion of
the multimedia field and the accompanying pictorial turn as “a denial of
ekphrasis.” Since ekphrasis depends upon a written or spoken text, he claims
that there is a tendency in popular prose and multimedia to strive for the
natural sign “in the realm of the visual rather than through heightened verbal
expression” (Bolter 1996: 265). Cecilia Lindhe´ (2013), on the other hand, has
reinterpreted the traditional concept she calls “printed ekphrasis,” with its
emphasis on the description of a visual artwork, to make ekphrasis workable
in a new digital context. Consequently, she seeks a “digital ekphrasis” that
focuses the process of visualization by adding “touch,” a digital ekphrasis
characterized by bodily interaction that conveys “an aesthetic of tactility;
digital ¼ finger” (Lindhe´ 2013: 3).
On a general level, Bolter’s claim that the rapid growth of various multi-
media expressions and the development of virtual reality tend to make
ekphrasis in effect obsolete undoubtedly has some truth to it. Nevertheless,
individual writers do take advantage of the new digital technologies in order
to present intermedial and multimedial combinations in which ekphrasis
proves to be a prominent mode of writing. On a purely practical level,
Bolter’s definite “denial” of ekphrasis therefore needs to be moderated.
However thought-provoking and stimulating Lindhe´’s reinterpretation of
the concept, I maintain that the re-presentational qualities of verbal ekphra-
sis are present in my digital examples, at least to a minimal degree. To some
extent, I share Lindhe´’s well-founded interest in the user’s interactivity
generated by the digital medium. Various degrees of interaction prove to
be essential components in the following discussion, though in a different
sense than Lindhe´’s “tactility.” I retain the notion of “verbal representation
of visual representation” (Heffernan 1993: 3) and variations of it as a basic
quality of ekphrasis, in order not to render the concept too broad and
imprecise.
Since the “pictorial turn” (Mitchell 1994) and with the growth of Internet,
our postmodern culture thrives on images, which are more accessible and
more easily distributed now than they have ever been. Before we move on to
examine these new challenges and opportunities for the ekphrastic writer and
the computer-based reader, I briefly refer to two websites exclusively aimed
at promoting ekphrastic writing in a nonvirtual-reality context. In doing so,
Jansson
† Ekphrasis and Digital Media
301
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/299/528880/0390299.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 4 ──
I aim to highlight digital media as important distribution channels that prove
also to have a positive impact on the production of ekphrasis.
The Light Ekphrastic is a quarterly online journal dedicated to the creation
of new written and visual artworks created in collaboration between artists.
For each issue writers and artists are paired, each creating a new poem, story,
photograph, or painting inspired by work previously submitted by their part-
ner artist. A similar principle operates in the website SPARK: Art from Writing:
Writing from Art, which centers around ten-day project rounds, in which
participants create new work using someone else’s art, writing, or music as
inspiration. Each resulting work is then displayed online together with the
piece that inspired it. Both of these websites contain a large number of
ekphrases, verbal re-presentations of other artworks, which of course vary
enormously in their degree of mimetic adherence to the artworks, but essen-
tially not in kind. They are part of an interartistic dialogue whereby visual art
objects and poems/stories appear simultaneously on the digital page, regard-
less of which expression comes first in the creative process. The combinatory
pairings of artist and poet in The Light Ekphrastic contain four contributions,
two from the painter and two from the poet, each answering or responding to
the other’s work, leaving us with verbal re-presentations as well as iconic/
visual re-presentations of the objects in question. However, in these inter-
medial combinations the digital medium is principally used to distribute and
disseminate the work, whereas the actual creation of each individual work
does not rely on computer-based technologies. Digital possibilities are real-
ized only insofar as the user/reader/viewer is invited to click on the visual art
object to access an enlarged version of it.
My subsequent discussion focuses on three examples of digital born
ekphrasis of a slightly different kind, making use of digital possibilities to
various degrees. The Swedish writer Lotta Lotass’s tetralogy Redwood (2008–
9), Hemvist (2009, Abode), Kraftverk (2009–10), and Nya Dikter (New Poems),
published 2008–11 on the website Autor Eter, makes use of ekphrasis as a
mode of writing in relation to a vast number of remediated photographs in
the form of picture postcards. Edward Falco’s Chemical Landscapes Digital Tales
(2006), available on the homepage of the Electronic Literature Organization
(ELO), is a suite of image–text combinations in which photograms are the
object of ekphrastic representations. Accounts of the Glass Sky (2006 [2002]) by
M. D. Coverley (Marjorie Luesebrink), published in ELO’s first collection of
electronic literature, is based on old black and white remediated photo-
graphs that are linked to ekphrastic poems. As I show, ekphrasis in each
case becomes part of a multimedial experience or aesthetic event that in
various degrees relies on the active participation of the reader/viewer/
listener.
302
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/299/528880/0390299.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 5 ──
1. Lotta Lotass: Ekphrasis and the Remediated Picture Postcard
My point of departure is the Swedish writer Lotta Lotass, prolific novelist and
playwright, who mainly uses the printed book as a conventional medium, but
is also a highly experimental writer taking advantage of a variety of media to
compose and disseminate her work, such as the tetralogy published on the
website Autor Eter. A short characterization of the work as a whole is a
necessary starting point (cf. Jansson 2014: 223–25). I limit my comments to
the first three parts that form a thematic unity and in various ways explore
cultural-historical and visual expressions of modernity and modernization
through the late nineteenth and early-to-middle twentieth centuries.
Redwood consists of seventy photographs—picture postcards—of lumber-
jacks at work in North American redwood forests (see, e.g., figure 1) and
fifty-four mostly short texts. In the majority of these juxtapositions of text and
image the relationship is one-to-one, that is, one text related to one photo-
graph. But in a few cases we are dealing with several photographs displaying
identical visual motifs that are linked to one and the same text, that is, many-
to-one, following Yacobi’s schematization of ekphrastic relationships (1995:
Figure 1
Text on the back of the card: “Giant Fir, Washington. Made in Germany.
Sprouse & Son, Tacoma, Wash., Importers and Publishers” (Lotass 2008 – 9: 27:76).
Jansson
† Ekphrasis and Digital Media
303
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/299/528880/0390299.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 6 ──
602). The texts included in Redwood are of radically different types and
represent a number of different genres, fictional as well as nonfictional.
Lotass not only mixes art forms and media but also includes a vast amount
of genres and text types. Some of these are quotations, others are original
with Lotass.
Hemvist comprises forty-six texts and fragments of texts, which correspond
to one hundred and three picture postcards in color of the exteriors of mental
hospitals in the United States. The exact dates when the photographs were
taken are not indicated except in a few instances, but in the tetralogy as a
whole we are probably dealing with a period from the end of the nineteenth
to the middle of the twentieth century. As in Redwood, the texts included are of
various kinds and formats. The longest text fills six pages in printed form, the
shortest only two lines.
Finally, Kraftverk is made up of sixty-two texts connected to sixty-four pho-
tographic postcards in color of the interiors of Swedish and US power plants.
This part of the tetralogy is somewhat differently organized. In Kraftverk all
digital pages have short and identically formatted ekphrases in the upper left
corner. Many of these ekphrases are supplemented by factual comments
taken from scientific literature and placed below the pictures. The comments
usually relate to the pictures by focusing on relevant technological and his-
torical perspectives. On a few occasions, Lotass has omitted factual material
and chosen rather to quote thematically relevant poetry and prose from other
Swedish authors.
A conglomerate of original and appropriated texts and remediated photo-
graphs are made to coexist in Lotass’s work. One striking feature is the
relationship between texts and pictures. That texts and pictures are reproduced
side by side on the same digital page means that the reader, who is also a
viewer, meets word and image at the same time. The different sign systems
coexist but are also visually and graphically separated from each other and
therefore also appear as independent medial expressions. At the same time,
however, the fact that text and picture appear simultaneously, though they
are separated spatially, means that they jointly form a meaningful whole.
Nevertheless, the remediated photographs and Lotass’s texts are obviously
neither created nor produced simultaneously.
We could therefore make a distinction between reception and production, and
between the morphology and syntax of word-and-image relations, according
to a modified application of A. Kibe´di Varga’s basic taxonomy (1989: 33–
35). Varga postulates, with respect to object level relations, that word and
image can appear either simultaneously or consecutively. In the first case, the
beholder meets words and images at the same time and cannot perceive them
separately (as in emblems or comics). In other cases, the artist produces an
304
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/299/528880/0390299.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 7 ──
ekphrasis inspired by a scene from a preexisting image or from some preex-
isting text, such as the Bible or Homer’s epics. This means that the beholder
sees a picture and the reader reads a poem without necessarily having access
to the source of reference. Simultaneous appearance does not in itself, how-
ever, imply that the words and images in emblems, for example, have been
created simultaneously. In terms of production, image and text always
appear consecutively if they originate from different artists, but from the
point of view of reception, there is according to Varga a great difference
between cultural products that offer words and images at the same time and
those that belong to one domain only, although they owe their existence to a
cultural product previously made in another domain.
With respect to Lotass’s work, we have to conclude that word and image do
not appear either simultaneously or consecutively, but simultaneously and con-
secutively. It is not a question of either/or. From this it also follows that in
those instances in which the relationship between text and photograph is
ekphrastic, the image is present on two different ontological levels at the same
time: as verbal ekphrastic re-presentation and as digitally remediated iconic/
indexical sign.
This is also a circumstance that Yacobi has recently noted in her discus-
sion of ekphrasis in the museum book of poetry (2013: 14), in which we in
principle encounter a similar word–image configuration, adding digiti-
zation as a further complicating factor. Following Yacobi’s line of thought,
I would like to point out one of the effects of this particular intermedial
combination since it is relevant to Lotass’s work. Yacobi (ibid.: 3) reasons
that the simultaneous availability of the image facilitates communication
with the reader, who without difficulty can locate, read, and interpret the
visual object together with the accompanying poem. As a consequence,
the presence of the image significantly increases the possibilities of word
and image relationships available to the poet: “No longer constrained to
specify and integrate any details of the artwork—they’re all there, in the
visual component—the poet can turn the image into ‘a point of departure’”
(ibid.: 17). The poem is free to go its own way and can take any direction it
pleases, such as fantasy, anachronistic narrative, or ideological subversive-
ness. Yacobi suggests that the relationship to the accompanying artwork/
image/photograph changes accordingly. This is what happens in Lotass’s
Hemvist (Abode) in which she undermines the ideological context of the asy-
lum photographs. Often she takes the iconic element, the asylum building,
as a starting point, then deviates from it by giving voice to those unseen and
confined behind the asylum walls, as in the last image–text configuration
(figure 2) where we hear the patients speaking their pain and suffering in
Jansson
† Ekphrasis and Digital Media
305
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/299/528880/0390299.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 8 ──
a passage declaring: “You will know us from our voices. / The lonely and
broken” (my translation).1
Since Lotass’s work incorporates and activates various media, let me add a
few remarks regarding digital publication, inspired by Lars Ellestro¨m’s model
for understanding intermedial relations (2010: 11–48). The computer I use in
order to gain access to Lotass’s work is a technical medium, a physical object
with a capacity to mediate or display other forms of basic media, such as still
pictures (e.g., picture postcards), or visual texts (e.g., printed poetry). Fur-
thermore, the computer in principle offers the reader an opportunity to
interact in more or less sophisticated ways with the material interface. In
Lotass’s work this possibility is available throughout in that the reader can
click on every picture to access an enlarged version of it. The effect of this
interaction of course is meaningful, since the syntactical relation between
word and picture on the page is broken, and for a moment the picture alone
occupies the center of the viewer’s attention. It is no longer an iconic element
juxtaposed to the words.
In Hemvist Lotass furthermore uses these digital possibilities of the medium
to give the reader access to links to external materials—both texts and still
pictures—that contextualize her own page. In Kraftverk, moving pictures in
Figure 2
Text on the back of the card: “Danvers, Mass. Mass Hospital for Insane. The
Hugh C. Leighton Co. Manufacturers, Portland, Me., U.S.A. 25572 Printed in Germany”
(Lotass 2009: 72:131).
1. “Pa˚ va˚ra ro¨ster skall ni ka¨nna oss. / De ensamma och brustna.”
306
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/299/528880/0390299.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 9 ──
the form of film are mediated digitally and can be activated as background
material via external linkage. On one occasion, Lotass in Kraftverk offers
the possibility of activating yet another medium, namely music, so that this
page is given an audiovisual character that turns the user into a reader/
viewer/listener.
Since a large part of the incorporated material consists of photographs
made available on the computer, one medium being represented in another,
J. David Bolter and Richard A. Grusin’s (1999) clarification of “remedia-
tion,” identified as a defining characteristic of the new digital media, becomes
relevant. At one extreme, “an older medium is highlighted and represented
in digital form without any apparent irony and critique,” which would be
the case for picture galleries containing, for example, digitized photographs
(Bolter and Grusin 1999: 45). Lotass’s suite of photographs falls into this
category. Here the electronic medium is not placed in opposition to pho-
tography, or printing for that matter; “instead, the computer is offered as a
new means of gaining access to these older materials, as if the content of the
older media could simply be poured into the new one,” whereby the elec-
tronic version pretends to be “transparent” (ibid.: 45). However, even if the
digital medium strives to erase itself, the computer cannot avoid making its
presence felt. In Lotass’s case, this is apparent since the viewer is encouraged
to click on the photograph to access an enlarged version of it or to retrieve
further relevant material via an external link.
To conclude, there is a certain amount of modest digital interaction in
Lotass’s work, but we are not dealing with an electronic hypertext. The inter-
action does not offer a choice between different paths through a work with
several text nodes that present different stories. The radical nature of Lotass’s
work is not so much characterized by sophisticated possibilities of digital
interaction, but rather by its intermedial mixture of genres, text types, and
pictures. In this instance ekphrasis turns out to be a dominant mode of writ-
ing, a guiding principle, which binds this vast and diverse material together.
From here, we need to move on and ask questions about the specific
photographic conditions for this type of transformation in Lotass’s tetralogy.
The photographs are remediated real photo postcards. As cultural products,
the photo postcards included in Redwood were originally part of a large socio-
economic transformation, when the United States shifted from a rural and
small-town society to a consumer-driven and industrialized mass-society
(Bogdan and Weseloh 2006: 25–29). Furthermore, all the included photo
postcards in Lotass’s suite can in some basic sense be characterized as real-
istic, that is as (seemingly) direct representations of reality. The intractable
question of photographic realism or the essence of photography thereby
becomes an issue.
Jansson
† Ekphrasis and Digital Media
307
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/299/528880/0390299.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 10 ──
We could describe the images in question as documentary photographs,
taken to capture certain working environments, public buildings, and indus-
trial plants. There is hardly any artistic intention behind them, but these
realistic and documentary photographs are inserted by Lotass in a context
that gives them aesthetic value and makes them artistically meaningful. This
is done to a large extent via the ekphrastic mode of writing.
It would be a mistake to assert that the realistic appearance of the photo-
graphs, their essential transparency, so to speak, automatically means that
they signify in an unambiguous fashion (cf. Van Gelder and Westgeest 2011:
14–40). Less than ever does “the mere ‘reproduction of reality’ say anything
about that reality,” Walter Benjamin declared in 1931, quoting Bertolt
Brecht on photography (2008: 293–94). A realistic and documentary photo-
graph of an exterior of, for example, a mental hospital in Wisconsin in the
early 1900s (figure 3) does not say anything about the tragic histories and
personal destinies that have unfolded inside its walls. To emphasize this
attitude, the picture is given a commentary. This is exactly what happens
in Lotass’s ekphrases: they add meaning to the realistic photograph, as in
Hemvist:
Only walk along the straight, white bands of the paving stones. The flowers, the
bushes, the trees stand where they are supposed to stand and do not ask. The grass
is growing on the ground where it is planted to grow and is not obstinate, is not
reluctant. And the water stays inside its planed, tiled edges and is not averse, does
not dispute, does not offer resistance. Tread on the straight, white bands. Do not
look out towards the thick forest. Do not look up on the light sky. The house
commands, the house orders and governs and spreads symmetrically out towards
its corners.2 (Lotass 2009: 2:4; my translation)
When the photograph is combined with texts its various potential layers
of meaning can be led in specific discursive directions (Van Gelder and
Westgeest 2011: 165). Lotass’s ekphrasis offers a description of the iconic
elements in the photograph; the asylum building and its immediate surround-
ings. Concrete visual elements are denoted, and more importantly they
are read into the connotative code of the photograph. They are inserted
into an overall ethical and ideological discourse characterized by prohibition,
restriction, subordination, obedience, and submission. The iconic elements
are thereby qualified as parts of a power relation.
2. “Endast ga˚ la¨ngs stenplattornas raka, vita band. Blomstren, buskarna, tra¨den sta˚r da¨r de skall
sta˚ och fra˚gar inte. Gra¨set va¨xer o¨ver marken da¨r det a¨r satt att va¨xa och strider inte och a¨r inte
genstra¨vigt, a¨r inte dorskt. Och vattnet ha˚ller sig innanfo¨r sina planade, kaklade kanter och
tredskas inte, fejdar inte, spja¨rnar inte emot. Sa¨tta ner stegen pa˚ de raka, vita banden. Inte se ut
mot den ta¨ta skogen. Inte se upp mot den ljusa himlen. Huset kommenderar, huset befaller och
styr och viker sig symmetriskt ut mot sina kanter.”
308
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/299/528880/0390299.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 11 ──
Thus the ekphrasis always adds a particular perspective and by doing so it
also indirectly reveals the seemingly objective and realistic photograph as a
particular perspective on reality. The belief in some essential realism inherent
in photography is thereby effectively repudiated in Lotass’s work. According
to John Tagg (1988: 3), the indexicality of photography, the casual link
between the prephotographic referent and the sign, cannot guarantee any-
thing in terms of meaning. The remediated paper-copy, originally the result
of an optical and chemical process that organizes human experience and desire,
can be made meaningful in a number of different ways. The ekphrastic mode
of writing is one instance in which this negotiation is given concrete expression.
2. Edward Falco: Photograms and Ekphrasis, Stasis and Movement
The Internet and the computer offer other examples of how ekphrasis func-
tions in the digital age. As noted, Lotass’s work is produced and disseminated
by the digital medium but does not to any large extent explore the artistic and
technical possibilities of the medium. Digital poetry proper, however, often
uses graphic elements, colors, images, and movement, which separates it
from printed poetry. Technically, these multimedial poems are made with
commercial software applications, such as Flash in the case of Edward Falco’s
Chemical Landscapes Digital Tales (2006) and M. D. Coverley’s Accounts of the Glass
Sky (2006 [2002]). Flash permits a variety of visual and kinetic properties in
which text, images, and sound are all handled as objects that can be orga-
Figure 3
Text on the back of the card: “Asylum, Richland Center, Wis. B1719B2
Published by H. G. Zimmerman & Co. Chicago” (Lotass 2009: 2:4)
Jansson
† Ekphrasis and Digital Media
309
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/299/528880/0390299.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 12 ──
nized on a two-dimensional plane (called a “scene”) with an added temporal
dimension (a timeline with different “scenes”) and given different character-
istics and behaviors. This application allows the creator to transform letters
and set them in motion. Typography, color, size, and fonts can be changed in
a number of ways. Text fragments can be cut, copied, and pasted into differ-
ent arrangements. As Engberg (2007: 31) points out, collage techniques have
probably never been easier to employ, a circumstance with direct relevance
for contemporary creators of ekphrasis.
In Falco’s case we are dealing with an electronic hypertext and ekphrastic
poetry that is not only digitally distributed but also digitally created. As Hart-
mann (2015: 123) has noted, Falco’s landscapes and tales constitute an intri-
cate mixture of media. Falco’s suite is made up of eight different image–text
pairs showing surfaces with poems on nonfigurative shapes of color, denser
and darker at the bottom and lighter above, intended to give the impression
of earth and sky. Since the visual mode is abstract, ekphrasis could here
perhaps better be characterized as “verbalization” (Clu¨ver 1998: 44) than
verbal mimetic re-presentation. As Falco (2006) explains, the abstract photo-
graphic landscapes are photograms, the result of photosensitive paper being
subjected to chemicals and light. According to the introductory text, the
photograms were created by Mary Pinto and the design is by Will Stauffer-
Norris, so Chemical Landscapes Digital Tales is a collaborative artwork, in which
the computer as a technical medium and physical object is used to mediate
text and images and, in the process, a new and complex multimedia product
is created in which the reader/viewer is invited to take active part. Indeed,
as Hayles (2008: 22) has pointed out, “[t]he multimodality of digital art
works challenges writers, users, and critics to bring together diverse expertise
and interpretive traditions so that the aesthetic strategies and possibilities of
electronic literature may be fully understood.” A major characteristic of a
computer-mediated text is, according to Hayles (ibid.: 164), its multimodal-
ity, since text, images, and sound can all be represented as binary code, and
the computer becomes the medium that contains all other media within itself.
As the reader/viewer engages with Chemical Landscapes Digital Tales, it be-
comes clear that some kind of participation is required to activate the work.
If the user does not engage with the work, the title image will simply stay on
the screen. When the reader clicks on the title page, the texts and landscapes
gradually fade in and out, with the landscape emerging slightly before the text
that is subsequently projected onto the landscape. The photogram then fades
out, leaving the text for a second by itself in the viewer’s attention, but it in
turn fades before the reader has had time to finish reading. The sequential
ordering in the appearance of image and text should not be given any hier-
archical significance. But the fact that the image appears first and the text is
310
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/299/528880/0390299.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 13 ──
projected onto the image afterward may indicate that the symbolic signs of
the text to some extent are about the image, rather than the other way around.
Subsequently, the reader has the option to click again to finish reading or to
move around randomly between the texts and pick up pieces of a story that
could be put together in different ways with each new reading. Falco thus
intentionally rejects the old Aristotelian logic of beginning, middle, and end
for a hypertextual reading in which one enters and exits the fictional world
anywhere, thus creating a new experience with each encounter.
There is a basic ekphrastic relationship between poems and images in that
the texts throughout describe the colors and shifting nuances of the accom-
panying images. One of the texts, presented below, is projected onto a light
blue background with touches of white short vertical lines and irregular
rounded shapes with white edges. It is important to note that quoting the
poem in its entirety and presenting it as printed text here, in a further form of
re-remediation, makes it “static” since its digitized and kinetic qualities are
eliminated:
Rain.
Looking down on mountains through rain, through a rain-spotted windshield.
Driving somewhere on a high mountain road.
Sky the thick blue storm.
Storm, mountain, rain, driving, high mountain road.
Clouds through a streaked windshield rain-spotted.
Land undulating dreamlike through cloud rain storm-light.
Driving somewhere on a high mountain road the place is gone the year the
season but the high mountain road and the heavy rain through the windshield
beating on the windshield the car gone the make of the car the year the reason
for driving the drive where it began where it was going all that remains the storm
the mountain the rain a high mountain road looking down on land undulating
dreamlike on mountains obscured in the blue light of the storm in the storm light
and you beside me beside me in the car driving nowhere going nowhere remain
there a part of the clouds the land the storm a part of the drive storm mountain
rain the blue sky, you a part I a part land through rain-spotted a part, a part of
the sky steelblue stormlight drive. (Falco 2006)
The text has a striking visual iconicity in itself, the upper part with shorter
lines and wider spacing contrasts with the part below where the lines are
longer and the spacing denser. This digital poem thus inscribes itself into a
literary tradition of visual and typographical experimentation going back to
Apollinaire’s calligrammes at the beginning of the twentieth century and con-
tinued in the concrete poetry of the 1950s and 1960s. Indeed, Falco’s
Jansson
† Ekphrasis and Digital Media
311
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/299/528880/0390299.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 14 ──
ekphrastic poems have a visual organization reminiscent of early pattern-
poetry. The decisive difference between the printed experiments and the
digital counterparts is of course the movement of the latter works.
This organization of the graphic image also corresponds, according to
Falco, to the notion of sky and earth represented in the photogram. The
text as visual image could therefore be said to mime the composition of the
photogram. With regard to contents the quoted poem refers to the charac-
teristic blue color, the light touches of white strokes and the white formations
on the photogram, giving the impression of a storm-ridden rainy sky with
clouds. This is a textual denotation and interpretation of certain iconic ele-
ments, the coloring and the shapes, on the remediated photogram. From
here the text deviates from the image and adds meaning: vague memory
fragments from a car journey high up in the mountains, two persons looking
through the rainy windscreen on a stormy landscape. From the abstract
image the text infers rudiments of a narrative plot with agents, a movement
indicated by the couple’s “driving.” We are, indeed, encouraged to read a
digital “tale.” Movement is also actualized on another level in the digital
fading in and fading out of the poems and landscapes. In this instance the
gradual fading of the text and image corresponds to the vague and fading
memory of a car trip sometime in the past, most of which has vanished except
for the memory of the rain and storm in the mountains. From the reader’s
point of view, the visual fading and the fading memory verbalized in the text
correspond. To counter this notion of “movement” one should add that
“stillness” is also invoked in Falco’s digital tales, such as the one beginning:
Placid. Idylic. Still.
Peaceful. Piece. Please
Place.
An Idylic place still, a peaceful place.
A piece of peace, an undulating expanse.
Currents effuse effused vent outward upward easily flowing
Colors deep streams of dense color pool swell rise flow
Under idylic place still peaceful deep streams of dense color flow swell rise
easily flowing deep streams of color effuse vent easily suffuse spread outward
upward under sky blue horizon under the fading ridges the colors deepened and
descend where dense descent darkening pressing down to depths out of which
stream vent find faults and fissures swell easily upward outward streaming to an
undulating expanse an idylic place a peaceful place still over dense depths,
please, please. (Falco 2006)
312
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/299/528880/0390299.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 15 ──
The serene stillness of the idyllic scene is invoked through an elliptic enu-
meration of adjectives in the first line. As a whole, the text is structured by
euphonic effects in which alliteration and assonance become a driving force
binding the lines together. The green and blue lower half of the photogram,
where the colors merge into each other, is distinctly separated from the
whiteness of the upper half, giving a sensation of a sea in motion under an
empty sky. The coloring and composition generate the ekphrastic interpre-
tation of “undulating” movement of water, while the stillness in the first lines
gradually gives way to movement that descends further into “depths,” cor-
responding to the successively deepening green coloring of the lower half of
the photogram.
In Falco’s digitized project the old and obsolete dichotomy of stillness
and movement within the arts is problematized in an interesting way. The
sequential reading and decoding of the symbolic signs of the text that rest on a
movement of the eyes from left to right, top to bottom, are countered by a
movement whereby the text visually fades away. This has the effect of down-
playing the orthodox way of consuming written texts, to the benefit of an
interactive engagement with a multimedial artwork in which conventional
ways ofapprehending,“reading” and “viewing,” “movement,” and “stillness,”
are no longer relevant. To read a text in a digital environment requires a
different physical engagement with the text and its medium, since a handling
of software functions is added to reading. However, the technical interaction
with the text does not mean that its contents and semantics should be for-
gotten. The reader still has the opportunity to interpret the symbolic signs of
the digital text in order to uncover its meaning, but to get at the meaning of
these digital ekphrases the reader/viewer/user first has to physically interact
with the work.
3. M. D. Coverley: Ekphrasis and Multimodality
M. D. Coverley’s Accounts of the Glass Sky (2006 [2002]) is a complex multi-
modal mixture of text, image, and sound that thematizes disillusion and loss
of the past. The blue sky, an iconic sign conventionally associated with long-
ing and dreams, is here taken to represent boundaries and fears. Coverley
(2006 [2002]) clarifies her intention to capture “the experience of fluid nego-
tiation between a past that we think we know and a present/future we
recognize only in the moment of transmutation.” In itself, the movement
between text and image implies a sort of narrative in which the “story” is not
fully rendered by either image, text, or sound alone but by the oscillations
between them. In this multimodal storytelling, the ekphrastic feature proves
to be an essential component.
Jansson
† Ekphrasis and Digital Media
313
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/299/528880/0390299.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 16 ──
Accounts of the Glass Sky is composed of seven old black and white photo-
graphs projected as windows onto the glass facade of a modern skyscraper.
Through this visual superimposition, Coverley’s suite contrasts modernity
and history, present and past, time and memory. Just as in Lotass’s tetralogy,
old photographs are remediated via binary code on the computer screen.
The difference is that Coverley takes this remediation one step further in a
digital manipulation of the visual surface of the photographs.
When the user/viewer moves the mouse cursor over one of the photo-
graphs, a larger version of it appears. This means that the formerly passive
spectator becomes an active user who can click and intervene. The user is
consequently invited to interact through Flash application by clicking on
the photograph to access parts of the story comprising Accounts of the Glass
Sky. Doing so makes the stanzas of a short poem gradually appear, projected
beside or onto the photograph; moreover, as in Falco’s work, almost before
the reader has finished reading it the poem disappears and the photograph
starts to change, wither, and disintegrate, rendering it indistinct and blurred,
or completely covering it with other visual shapes. The photographs exist as
digital files in binary code, which allows for this metamorphosis whereby the
pixels, the smallest of picture elements, are warped and manipulated. What
we have here is ekphrasis as an event that unfolds due to the interaction
between the user/reader/viewer and the work in its material instantiation.
Each of the seven multimedial combinations is furthermore accompanied
by a different sound effect, thus adding yet another sensory experience. The
user is thus called upon to engage equally in the activities of reading, watch-
ing, and listening. This means that the user not only reads the poem or
looks at the photograph, but experiences a multisensory event. Finally, a
new text appears alongside the changed and changing photograph: a short
poem of four to five lines in italics explicitly commenting on the glass sky
theme of the suite in lines that resemble a poetic epilogue. Hence, what
we encounter in Coverley’s Accounts of the Glass Sky are four different layers
of representation and two combinatory pairs: poem–photograph/warped
photograph–epilogue.
The poems are throughout ekphrastic descriptions and interpretations
of the visual motifs of the photographs. As in Lotass’s suite, the photographs
are thus present on two different ontological levels at the same time: they are
both digitally remediated and verbally re-presented. The photographs in-
cluded in Coverley’s work are all black and white portraits of young children
or middle-aged people, all full of life, vitality, hope, and expectations. One
of the photographs captures a group of young children on a lawn, neatly
dressed, lined up, and looking straight into the camera, some of them smil-
ing, others with more serious faces. The accompanying poem reads:
314
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/299/528880/0390299.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 17 ──
Report on the Sky, 1920:
The sky was just there.
No one worried about it. The children
who were at this birthday party have
lived their lives and are at rest, having never
wondered when the sky would
turn to glass.
In 1920, in Hollywood, CA
there was talk of pollution,
but everyone said
that it would go away.
And it has. (Coverley 2006 [2002])
The poem then disappears from the digital page, and the photograph is
gradually transformed: it darkens, making the children into shadow-like
figures merging with the background. The photograph is then compressed,
vertically deforming the bodies of the children. Another photograph captures
two children on a lawn in front of a low hedge, a girl dressed in a skirt and
wearing her hair in plaits, and a boy in dungarees. They are standing straight
and side-by-side, looking right at us. From this photographic starting point
Coverley’s ekphrasis introduces a time line:
Report on the Sky, 1949:
Two children in the Valley on a windy
day?
Wesley will not die in a jungle war
twenty years later.
Nor will he marry Miss Pigtails.
No, he will die in a hospital
for the survivors. Situated, this place,
in another Valley under startled blue.
As late as 1990, wheeling around
on his meds.
Looking for his cell phone. (Coverley 2006 [2002])
The short poetic epilogue, when it finally appears, declares: “but he had forgotten
/ what it might mean / to walk downstairs / and across the / grass,” thus contrasting
the young boy on the lawn with the old man and his withering memory.
Through the movement on the digital page the photograph is gradually
enlarged and the whiteness increases, which causes the figures of the children
Jansson
† Ekphrasis and Digital Media
315
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/299/528880/0390299.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 18 ──
to fade out. Subsequently they almost completely disappear behind a bluish-
black-grey pattern of colors covering their bodies.
The multimodal combination of verbal ekphrastic re-presentationand dig-
itally produced movement deals with time and pastness. Therefore, Accounts of
the Glass Sky could be said to thematize the essence of photography, which lies
in its unique ability to capture a moment of the past, to freeze time, as it were,
and seemingly to suspend impermanence.
However, as Susan Sontag claims, all photographs are also “memento mori,”
since taking a photograph is to participate in another person’s “mortality,
vulnerability, mutability” (1973: 15). By slicing out this moment and freez-
ing it, a photograph testifies to “time’s restless melt.” Photographs state the
innocence and vulnerability, Sontag continues, of lives heading toward their
own destruction, and “this link between photography and death haunts all
photographs of people” (ibid.: 70). Herein lies the paradox of the historical
portrait that Barthes has formulated with striking clarity (1981: 96). It lets us
observe “an anterior future of which death is the stake”: this will happen
and it has happened. Coverley’s remediated old photographs of people
convey something of this paradox, the notion of death in the past future—
a paradox that is furthermore explicitly verbalized in the quoted ekphrases
from Accounts of the Glass Sky.
In the case of the intermedial and multimedial works here discussed, it
is clear that they explore medial relations in a variety of ways to generate
poetic meaning. Ekphrasis is an integrated part of multimedial experiences
or events that require the active participation of the reader/viewer/listener
to various degrees. Moreover, the digitally mediated ekphrases that coexist
with their re-presented visual objects—digitally mediated photographs
(Lotass, Coverley) and photograms (Falco)—allow the visual work to be pres-
ent on two ontological levels simultaneously. However, in the case of Falco
and Coverley, the coexistence is momentary since the digital technology
produces a movement that dynamizes any static coexistence. By setting the
images and ekphrastic texts in motion Falco and Coverley allude to the long-
standing question of stillness and movement within the arts and problematize
it in a new and productive way.
Movement in the works of Falco and Coverley could in fact be discussed
in four different senses (cf. Engberg 2007: 39): (1) the images and ekphrastic
poems moving on the screen through the reader’s/viewer’s interaction with
the work; (2) the physical movements of the user in clicking and passing the
mouse cursor over the screen; (3) the reading of the ekphrastic poems, which
relies on the movement of the eyes following the lines of the text; and finally
(4) the movement on the narrative level indicated by the symbolic signs in
Falco’s “tale.” Through the digital possibilities of software technique, the
316
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/299/528880/0390299.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 19 ──
kinetics of text and images in digital ekphrasis become an integral part of a
dynamic event and multimedial experience. The addition of sound in Cover-
ley’s work goes further in involving the user in a truly multisensory event.
Works Cited
Barthes, Roland
1981 Camera Lucida: Reflections on Photography, translated by Richard Howard (New York:
Farrar, Straus and Giroux).
Benjamin, Walter
2008 “Little History of Photography.” In The Work of Art in the Age of Its Technological Repro-
ducibility, and Other Writings on Media, edited by Michael W. Jennings, Brigid Doherty, and
Thomas Y. Levin, 274 – 98 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press).
Bogdan, Robert, and Todd Weseloh
2006 Real Photo Postcard Guide. The People’s Photography (New York: Syracuse University Press).
Bolter, Jay David
1996 “Ekphrasis, Virtual Reality, and the Future of Writing.” In The Future of the Book, edited
by Geoffrey Nunberg, 253 – 72 (Berkeley: University of California Press).
Bolter, J. David, and Richard A. Grusin
1999 Remediation: Understanding New Media (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
Clu¨ver, Claus
1998 “Quotation, Enargeia, and the Functions of Ekphrasis.” In Pictures into Words: Theoretical
and Descriptive Approaches to Ekphrasis, edited by Valerie Robillard and Els Jongeneel, 35 – 52
(Amsterdam: VU University Press).
Coverley, M. D. (Marjorie Luesebrink)
2006 [2002] Accounts of the Glass Sky, http://collection.eliterature.org/1/works/coverley
__accounts_of_the_glass_sky.html.
Ellestro¨m, Lars
2010 “The Modalities of Media: A Model for Understanding Intermedial Relations.” In
Media Borders, Multimodality, and Intermediality, edited by Lars Ellestro¨m, 11 – 48 (Basing-
stoke: Palgrave Macmillan).
Engberg, Maria
2007 Born Digital: Writing Poetry in the Age of New Media (Uppsala: Department of English,
Uppsala University; Karlskrona: School of Technoculture, Humanities, and Planning,
Blekinge Institute of Technology).
Falco, Edward
2006 Chemical Landscapes Digital Tales, http://collection.eliterature.org/1/works/falco
__chemical_landscapes_digital_tales.html.
Hartmann, Johanna
2015 “Ekphrasis in the Age of Digital Reproduction.” In Handbook of Intermediality: Literature —
Image — Sound — Music, edited by Gabriele Rippl, 113 – 27 (Berlin: De Gruyter).
Hayles, Katherine N.
2008 Electronic Literature: New Horizons for the Literary (Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre
Dame).
Heffernan, James A. W.
1993 Museum of Words: The Poetics of Ekphrasis from Homer to Ashbery (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press).
Jansson, Mats
2014 Poetens blick: Ekfras i svensk lyrik (The Poet’s Gaze: Ekphrasis in Swedish Poetry) (Stockholm:
Symposion).
Jansson
† Ekphrasis and Digital Media
317
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/299/528880/0390299.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 20 ──
2016 “Ekfras som poetiskt modus (Ekphrasis as Poetic Mode),” Nordisk poesi. Tidsskrift for
lyrikkforskning (Scandinavian Poetry. Journal of Poetry Research) 1: 51 – 71, www.idunn.no
/nordisk_poesi/2016/01.
n.d. The Light Ekphrastic, thelightekphrastic.com/ (accessed September 2, 2016).
Lindhe´, Cecilia
2013 “A Visual Sense Is Born in the Fingertips: Towards a Digital Ekphrasis,” The Digital
Humanities Quarterly 7, no. 1: 1 – 21.
Lotass, Lotta
2008 – 9 Redwood, www.autor.se/autoreter/kraftverk./index.htm.
2009 Hemvist, www.autor.se/autoreter/hemvist/index.htm.
2009 – 10 Kraftverk, www.autor.se/autoreter/kraftverk/index.htm.
Mitchell, W. J. T.
1994 Picture Theory: Essays on Verbal and Visual Representation (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press).
Robillard, Valerie
1998 “In Pursuit of Ekphrasis: An Intertextual Approach.” In Pictures into Words: Theoretical
and Descriptive Approaches to Ekphrasis, edited by Valerie Robillard and Els Jongeneel, 53 – 72
(Amsterdam: VU University Press).
Sontag, Susan
1973 On Photography (New York: Picador).
SPARK: Art from Writing: Writing from Art, www.getsparked.org/ (accessed September 7, 2016).
Tagg, John
1988 The Burden of Representation: Essays on Photographies and Histories (Minneapolis: University
of Minnesota Press).
Van Gelder, Hilde, and Helen Westgeest
2011 Photography Theory in Historical Perspective (Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell).
Varga, A. Kibe´di
1989 “Criteria for Describing Word-and-Image Relations,” Poetics Today 10: 31 – 53.
Yacobi, Tamar
1995 “Pictorial Models and Narrative Ekphrasis,” Poetics Today 16: 599 – 649.
2013 “Ekphrastic Double Exposure and the Museum Book of Poetry,” Poetics Today 34:
1 – 52.
318
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/299/528880/0390299.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025
