# A Visual Sense is Born in the Fingertips: Towards a Digital Ekphrasis
# Source: 000161.html
# BibTeX key: lindhe_visual_2013
# Zotero dir: 3107
# Extracted chars: 70362
# Format: HTML
============================================================

​
 

 
 

 

 

 
 homesubmissionsabout dhqexploredhq peoplenewscontact

 
 
 Search

 
 

 

 

 
 
 Current Issue
 2025: 19.3

 Preview Issue
 2025: 19.4

 Previous Issues
 2025: 19.2

 2025: 19.1

 2024: 18.4

 2024: 18.3

 2024: 18.2

 2024: 18.1

 2023: 17.4

 2023: 17.3

 2023: 17.2

 2023: 17.1

 2022: 16.4

 2022: 16.3

 2022: 16.2

 2022: 16.1

 2021: 15.4

 2021: 15.3

 2021: 15.2

 2021: 15.1

 2020: 14.4

 2020: 14.3

 2020: 14.2

 2020: 14.1

 2019: 13.4

 2019: 13.3

 2019: 13.2

 2019: 13.1

 2018: 12.4

 2018: 12.3

 2018: 12.2

 2018: 12.1

 2017: 11.4

 2017: 11.3

 2017: 11.2

 2017: 11.1

 2016: 10.4

 2016: 10.3

 2016: 10.2

 2016: 10.1

 2015: 9.4

 2015: 9.3

 2015: 9.2

 2015: 9.1

 2014: 8.4

 2014: 8.3

 2014: 8.2

 2014: 8.1

 2013: 7.3

 2013: 7.2

 2013: 7.1

 2012: 6.3

 2012: 6.2

 2012: 6.1

 2011: 5.3

 2011: 5.2

 2011: 5.1

 2010: 4.2

 2010: 4.1

 2009: 3.4

 2009: 3.3

 2009: 3.2

 2009: 3.1

 2008: 2.1

 2007: 1.2

 2007: 1.1

 Indexes
 Title

 Author

 
 
ISSN 1938-4122

 
 Announcements

 
 Call for Reviewers

 Call for Submissions

 
 

 

 
 DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly

 
 2013Volume 7 Number 1

 2013 7.1
 |
 XML
 |
 PDF
 |
 Print
 |
 See Recommendations

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 “A Visual Sense is Born in the Fingertips”: Towards a Digital Ekphrasis

 
 Cecilia Lindhé <cecilia_dot_lindhe_at_humlab_dot_umu_dot_se>, Umeå University

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abstract

 
 
 In this article, the significance of the rhetorical and modern definitions of
 ekphrasis will be discussed through the lens of digital literature and art. It
 attempts to reinscribe the body in ekphrastic practice by adding touch to the
 abstracted visualism of the eye, and emphasize defining features of the ancient
 usage: orality, immediacy and tactility. What I call the digital ekphrasis with its
 emphasis on enargeia, its strong connections with the ancient definition, and on the
 bodily interaction with the work of art, conveys an aesthetic of tactility;
 digitalis=finger. By tracing and elucidating a historical trajectory that takes the
 concept of ekphrasis in the ancient culture as a starting point, the intention is
 not
 to reject the theories of the late 1900s, but through a reinterpretation of ekphrasis
 put forward an example of how digital perspectives on classic concepts could
 challenge or revise more or less taken-for-granted assumptions in the humanities.
 In
 this context ‘the digital’ is not only a phenomenon that could be tied to certain
 digital objects or used as a digital tool, but as an approach to history, with strong
 critical potential. The aim is to show that one of the most important features of
 our
 digital culture is that it offers new perspectives – not only on current technology
 –
 but also on literary, cultural and aesthetic historical practices.

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 An investigation of ekphrasis in this sense
 also reveals some of the energies that dwell within the texts that, to us, are
 black words lying still on the white page but which, to the ancient reader, were
 alive with rich visual and emotional effects.
 
 
 Ruth Webb, Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient
 Rhetorical Theory and Practice (2009), 5  [Webb 2009]
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 Introduction

 
 1

 In his manifesto “Tactilism” (1921), the futurist F. T.
 Marinetti sketches out the principles of a tactile art form. He suggests that
 theaters where the spectators interact by holding on to ribbons that “produce tactile sensations with different
 rhythms” and tactile rooms where the floor beneath the dancers’ feet flows
 with running water can accomplish a multisensory engagement [Marinetti 1924, 199]. This futurist aesthetics that emphasizes
 immediacy and aims at penetrating the senses of the reader, viewer, and listener,
 without interpretative reflection, is physiological in nature, and obviously
 intimately connected to interactivity and touch: “A visual sense is born in the fingertips,”
 Marinetti claims [Marinetti 1924, 199].[1] Touching artifacts, such as sculptures,
 paintings and the objects of the Wunderkammer, was
 commonplace practice in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, and in ancient
 times cult statues and images were not mere representational objects – physical
 interaction was expected.[2] Since the
 conceptual art movements of the 1950s and 60s, touching artifacts has again become
 customary and more recently due to the increased corporeal engagement with digital
 interfaces [Classen 2005]. This emphasis on tactility contradicts
 “the tactiloclasm” that permeates aesthetic theory where the work of art is
 viewed as untouchable, and concerned with ocular scrutiny only [Huhtamo 2008].[3] How are
 we to account for the change in aesthetic expression when the interface encourages
 the spectator to touch the artifact and thus positions the entire body as essential
 for the experience and interpretation of the artwork?[4] A productive way to discuss these issues is
 through an examination of ekphrasis – a concept this article aims to
 revise.

 
 2

 The established definition of the term –– the description of pictorial art in words
 –– is actually a twentieth-century invention that has been modified for the analysis
 of printed texts. I will hereafter term it the printed ekphrasis.[5] As a
 critical term and literary genre, this type of ekphrasis focuses on
 words describing visual objects – a well-known ekphrastic poem is John Keats’ “Ode on a Grecian Urn” (1820). The printed
 ekphrasis is derived from the nineteenth-century museum – “the shrine where all poets worship in the
 secular age,” in the words of Heffernan — and has since been defined and
 discussed with reference to the printed word.[6]. The ancient rhetorical practice of ekphrasis is, on the other
 hand, defined by the assumption of a live audience and emphasizes immediacy and the
 impact on the listener. Further, it is much broader and includes not only artistic
 representations but also any description in nature or culture. When an
 orator spoke about a place, a monument or an event unseen or unfamiliar to the
 audience he was supposed to use details to create a visual image “in the eyes of the mind” of the listeners [Quintilian 1953, 8.3.62]. The rhetorical ekphrasis
 encompasses aspects relevant for our digital age that have not been fully perceived
 before; digital literature and art align with this concept of ekphrasis,
 especially in the way that its rhetorical meaning is about effect, immediacy,
 aurality, and tactility. The multimodal patterns of performativity in the rhetorical
 situation stage a space-body-word-image-nexus with relevance for how we could
 interpret and discuss digital aesthetics. 

 
 3

 By paying attention to the rhetorical ekphrasis and the oral culture’s
 focus on the audience, I wish to bring out a digital ekphrasis in which
 the primary focus is not the description of the subject matter, or the visual object,
 but rather the process of visualization.[7]
 This article attempts then, via the rhetorical ekphrasis, to reinscribe
 the body within the printed ekphrasis by adding touch to the abstracted
 visualism of the eye, and emphasize defining features of the ancient usage: orality,
 immediacy and tactility. The digital ekphrasis with its emphasis on
 enargeia (vividness), its strong connections with the ancient
 definition, and on the bodily interaction with the work of art, conveys an aesthetic
 of tactility; digitalis=finger. By tracing and elucidating a historical
 trajectory that takes the concept of ekphrasis in the ancient oral
 culture as a starting point, the intention is not to reject the theories of the late
 1900s, but through a reinterpretation of ekphrasis put forward an
 example of how digital perspectives on classic concepts could challenge or revise
 more or less taken-for-granted assumptions in the humanities. 

 
 4

 Here, the significance of the ancient rhetorical definition, as well as the modern
 definition of ekphrasis, will be studied through the prism of digital
 literature and art.[8] In this
 context “the digital” is not only a phenomenon that could be tied to certain
 digital objects or used as a digital tool, but as an approach to history, with the
 same critical potential as for example post-structuralism, gender theory or
 post-colonialism. The aim is to show that one of the most important features of our
 digital culture is that it offers new perspectives – not only on current technology,
 but also on our literary and cultural history, or our literacy, even.
 The dominance of print technology during the last five hundred years has certainly
 formed how we relate to art objects. With the advent of print technology, the
 rhetorical emphasis on speech over writing generated “a reordering in which writing – in the remediated form of
 print – would come increasingly to dominate the most important social venues of
 communication,” writes John Guillory in an essay on the concept of
 mediation [Guillory 2010, 326]. This could be compared to the ways
 in which the rhetorical meaning of ekphrasis has been obscured by print
 technology in a similar way to how the “explosive currency of the [media
 concept], in the communicative environment of modernity has relegated the
 genesis of the media concept to a puzzling obscurity”
  [Guillory 2010, 321]. 

 
 5

 This article, then, has as its wider scope to deconstruct the filter of printing
 technologies, with which we look at cultural history, and instead – with “the
 digital” as a lens in the form of digital literature and art – renegotiate an
 aesthetic practice that emanates from both rhetoric and print
 technology. Accordingly, I want to highlight one possible way for the digital
 humanities: the digital as a critical lens on aesthetic concepts and cultural
 history. 

 

 
 
 
 Rhetorical and Printed Ekphrasis 

 
 6

 
 Ekphrasis is a millennia-old concept that works both as a technical
 device and a literary mode. As a technical term within the study and practice of
 rhetoric, the origin of ekphrasis is documented in the first centuries
 AD where it occurs in the Progymnasmata – compositional
 exercises used in the Hellenistic schools. The Progymnasmata consists of four treatises attributed to Theon, Hermogenes,
 Nikolaos, and Aphthonios. Theon defines ekphrasis as “descriptive language, bringing what is
 portrayed clearly before the sight”
  [Kennedy, ed. 2003, 45]. Etymologically, ekphrasis originates from Greek ek
 (out) phrazein (to explicate, declare) and meant originally “to tell in full” (εκφραζω). The goal
 of ekphrasis was enargeia (εναργεια) – to make
 the motif graphic and alive for the spectator to “see” what was before him.
 ekphrasis is also a literary genre and frequently used in Greek and
 Latin literature where it appears for instance during the Homeric period in the
 Iliad, later in Hesiod’s Shield
 of Herakles, Euripides’ Electra and Ion, in Vergil’s Aeneid and in
 Eikones by Philostratus. Some later well known and
 frequently quoted ekphrases features in Dante’s Divine Comedy, in Shakespeare’s The Rape of
 Lucrece, in John Ashbery’s Self-Portrait in a Convex
 Mirror and in Rita Dove’s “Agosta the Winged Man and
 Rasha the Black Dove,” to mention just a few.

 
 7

 In the past few decades, attempts at defining ekphrasis conclude that it
 is a verbal description of, or interpretation of a visual work of art. For a long
 period of time, Leo Spitzer’s definition from 1955 set the tone: “[T]he poetic description of a pictorial
 or sculptural work of art, which description implies […] the reproduction
 through the medium of words, of sensuously perceptible objets d’art (‘ut
 pictura poesis’)”
  [Spitzer 1962, 72]. In Museum of Words James A. W. Heffernan works
 out a now well established definition: [E]kphrasis is the verbal representation
 of visual representation
 [Heffernan 1993, 3]. Even Heffernan’s definition has been
 criticized though, primarily for being too narrow since it does not include
 literature on literature or abstract art. Claus Clüver has suggested the following
 expansion of Heffernan’s definition: “
 Ekphrasis is the verbal representation of a real or fictitious text
 composed in a non-verbal sign system
 ”
  [Clüver 1997, 26]. By using a semiotic concept of text that also embraces music and
 architecture, the limits of ekphrasis are expanded to allow for art that
 is not merely visual. Tamar Yacobi chooses instead to depart from so-called
 ekphrastic models. These refer to qualities that are common to many
 images such as a specific technique, form, shared motifs or certain traits that are
 characteristic of an artist’s production [Yacobi 1999]. While Yacobi
 wishes to open up the concept to different kinds of image associations, other
 researchers maintain that ekphrasis must build on lucidity,
 enargeia. Somewhere in between Heffernan and Yacobi is Murray
 Krieger, who in ekphrasis: The Illusion of the
 Natural Sign starts from the classical demand for lucidity but extends the
 concept to include everything that links up with spatiality. Krieger’s description
 of
 how ekphrasis arrests the temporal flow of the narrative as it is
 dedicated to explore spatial dimensions, displays how strongly, still, this
 discussion is anchored in paragone, the tradition of the rivalry of the
 “sister arts” articulated in the aesthetic theories of e.g. G. E. Lessing and
 Edmund Burke [Krieger 1992, 7]. [9] This line of thought, which
 establishes a binary between spatial and temporal art forms in relation to
 ekphrasis, has been continued by scholars such as Krieger and
 Heffernan. W. J. T. Mitchell also writes about the struggle of domination between
 word and image and further argues that ekphrasis is an ideological
 tension between text and image: “The central goal of ekphrastic hope
 might be called ‘the overcoming of otherness.’ Ekphrastic poetry is the
 genre in which texts encounter their own semiotic ‘others’, those rival,
 alien modes of representation called the visual, graphic, plastic or
 ‘spatial’ arts”
  [Mitchell 1995, 156]. Scholars have also written about musical, pictorial and reverse
 ekphrasis and consequently it has been used to describe not only
 verbal transformations of the visual.[10] Attempts
 have thus been made to expand the concept in different directions, but common to the
 theorists discussed above, is their stressing the primary relevance of the referent,
 the visual object. However, in her important study of ekphrasis and
 film, Writing and Filming the Painting, Laura M. Sager
 Eidt claims that ekphrasis does not need to be a purely verbal
 representation of a visual object [Eidt 2007]. If the goal of the
 ekphrasis is to make the reader or spectator see, it is
 possible to push the emphasis from the verbal representation to the
 effect it has on the audience/spectator. To assume such an
 enargeia-perspective ties ekphrasis to reception rather
 than to the referent, and Eidt presents both a potential opening towards the
 rhetorical ekphrasis with her “cinematic ekphrasis” and for
 studying artworks that are not merely verbal. Another important exception is Andrew
 Sprague Becker’s The Shield of Achilles and the Poetics of
 Ekphrasis, in which he uses the rhetorical ekphrasis to
 analyze the Homeric Shield described in chapter 18 of The
 Iliad. Becker criticizes the focus on ekphrasis and
 “picture-like representation” and writes, “
 phrasis describes an experience of representations, not just their
 appearance”
  [Becker 1995, 11]. 

 
 8

 As we have seen above, in contemporary research, ekphrasis is a
 technical device that is used mainly to analyze texts or textual fragments that
 describe visual objects. But that was not the case in antiquity when
 ekphrasis could refer to a specific manner of speaking and writing, and
 could also include descriptions of places and people, as well as of events and
 stories. In fact, only Nikolaos mentions sculptures and pictures as object of
 ekphrasis and is doing so as a subcategory of ekphrasis
 [Kennedy, ed. 2003, 166–8]. Contrary to modern usage then, the purpose
 of the ancient definition was not to primarily describe works of art even if
 reference literature such as Oxford Classical Dictionary
 incorrectly defines ekphrasis
 “as the rhetorical description of a work
 of art, one of the types of progymnasmata
 ”
  [Oxford Classic Dictionary 1996].[11] In Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in
 Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Ruth Webb summarizes the important
 distinction between the rhetorical and the modern printed ekphrasis: “[I]n the ancient definition the referent
 is only of secondary importance; what matters […] is the impact on the
 listener”
  [Webb 2009, 7]. Crucial for an effective ekphrasis was an underlying quality of
 enargeia a stylistic effect that appeals to the senses of a listener;
 an event or a place were to be depicted so vividly as to make it come alive in the
 listener’s mind or eye [Zanker 1981]. The effect of
 enargeia is direct and defers interpretation as well as assessment of
 the credibility of the images to a later moment in time. The oral speaker situation
 entails there not being much room for interpretation, which of course requires images
 to be cogent and speak directly to the listener. Theorists that accept the modern
 definition are often content with establishing that it is an effect that makes the
 reader envision what is being described. But enargeia is not first and
 foremost a way to imitate an object, scene or person with words, but rather about
 the
 effect of seeing an object or an event; it concerns the process of
 visualization [Webb 2009, 95]. Quintilian, who in his Institutio Oratoria comments on the Progymnasmata, asserts that it is not necessary for the text to contain
 enargeia-markers, in Latin evidentia, (such as detailed
 descriptions, focus on events or symbols instead of actions), but it is rather the
 experience of metamorphosing from listener into spectator that may define a speech
 as
 being ekphrastic [Scholz 1998]; [Webb 2009, 9].
 Quintilian writes: 
 
 It is a great gift to
 be able to set forth the facts on which we are speaking clearly and vividly. For
 oratory fails of its full effect, and does not assert itself as it should, if its
 appeal is merely to the hearing, and if the judge merely feels that the facts on
 which he has to give his decision are being narrated to him, and not displayed in
 their living truth to the eyes of the mind. [Quintilian 1953, 8.2.62]
 

 
 

 
 9

 Quintilian’s exposition implies that ekphrasis penetrates the listener
 more deeply, which creates a distinction between words that, as it were, stays on
 the
 surface of the body and those that penetrate the inside and reach the mind’s
 eyes.[12]
 Quintilian describes language as close to a physical power that influences the
 listener’s body, and Longinos writes of its potential to affect the listener when
 the
 words works against the body similar to a physical force [Longinos 1991, 15.9]; [Webb 2009, 98].[13]
 

 
 10

 
 Ekphrasis and enargeia are sometimes difficult to define
 independently of each other, which is confirmed also in the ancient sources.[14] So, to better
 understand the physical and perceptible workings in ancient rhetoric, I will briefly
 discuss a theory of memory and imagination on which enargeia and
 ekphrasis are grounded: phantasia. In a rhetorical
 context phantasia signifies the orator’s internal image that he
 communicated to the listener and in doing so activated images that were latently
 stored in the listener’s mind.[15] Interesting and
 noteworthy in the rhetorical sources are the weight put on the viewers’ reception
 and
 how, as orator, one should practice foreseeing which mental pictures would be
 required to make the ekphrasis successful. According to Aristotle,
 phantasia is a process by which images were presented to the mind and
 he describes how sense impressions were imprinted on the soul, or in a physical way,
 inscribed to that part of the body that constitutes memory, creating so called
 memory-images (phantasmata) and in doing so emphasizes the physicality
 of these images.[16] According to Ruth Webb [Webb 2009, 107], this creates a “simulacrum of perception itself. It
 is the act of seeing that is imitated, not the object itself, by the creation
 of a phantasia that is like the result of direct perception”
  [Quintilian 1953, 2.6.1]. Ruth Webb [Webb 2009, 128] argues further that the “ancient theory of enargeia
 thus sidesteps the problem of how to represent the visual through the
 non-visual medium of language because of the connection that is assumed between
 words and mental images. Words do not directly represent their subjects, but
 are attached to a mental representation of that subject”
  [Webb 2009, 128]. Consequently, in modern practice of ekphrasis, focus lies on the
 ontological status of the visual object where the visual is a quality of the
 referent, whereas the rhetoricians emphasized the process of visualization and the
 effect it had on the listener.[17] The
 significance of the body and the emphasis on bodily senses in the rhetorical
 situation were thus crucial.[18] However, it must be remembered
 that the descriptions of how vivid description worked in the minds of the audience,
 according to Vasaly, suggest that “ancient, nonliterate society may well
 have possessed powers of pictorial visualization much greater and more intense
 than our own”
  [Vasaly 1993, 99]. [19] I will return to this below.

 

 
 
 
 Why, or, Why not Ekphrasis?

 
 11

 As Robert Denham’s bibliography Poets on Paintings 
 shows, the critical interest in ekphrasis has increased since the 1950s
 [Denham 2010]. And a propos the widespread use of
 ekphrasis in twentieth-century literature, one calls to mind Edna
 Longley’s 1988 essay “No More Poems About Paintings?”
 During this time, artistic, technological and ideological conditions have changed,
 but theories of ekphrasis have remained relatively constant and current
 research deals, above all, with the printed ekphrasis. As we have seen
 above, the ancient practice of ekphrasis and the concept used in modern
 literary criticism belong to fundamentally different systems, as well as different
 media configurations. Hewlett Koelb, in her highly relevant book The Poetics of Description, even claims that “this new ecphrasis with its
 emphasis on obviously mediated subject matter is not just narrower but in its
 most basic character exactly the opposite of ancient Greek
 ekphrasis, whose aim is immediacy”
  [Hewlett Koelb 2006, 5]. This discrepancy between the two systems could account for why new media
 theorists place the two concepts in the same category, but also are reluctant to use
 ekphrasis as a critical tool and artistic device in computer based
 media art.[20] When for example Jay David Bolter claims, “the breakout of the visual in
 contemporary prose and multimedia is a denial of ekphrasis.
 Popular prose and multimedia are striving for the natural sign in the realm of
 the visual rather than through heightened verbal expression”
  [Bolter 1996, 265], and Marie-Laure Ryan contends that “[i]n advanced VR system there will be no
 need for ekphrasis – the verbal description of a visual artwork –
 because the system will encompass all forms of representation, action and
 signification. The multisensory will also be the omnisemiotic”
  [Ryan 2011, 60–61],[21] the premises as well
 as the conclusion of such criticism invite reconsideration.[22]
 

 

 
 
 
 Ek-stasis

 
 12

 Aya Karpinska’s digital poem ek-stasis appears to be a
 three-dimensional architectural object that can be navigated by “walking” or
 “flying” around in it.[23] The words and the
 textual fragments, in different shades of gray, can be read from the front as well
 as
 from the back and some words are suspended in the air against a black background.
 No
 directions are given as to how or in which order the poem should be read, rather it
 is about paving your way among rectangles and words: “In a word, ‘ek-stasis’ constitutes an odd arrangement
 of letters in a very sparsely illustrated space where geometry gives the
 reader/user a few orientational cues for exploration and reading,” writes
 Maria Engberg [Engberg 2007, 47]. The title ekstasis
 (ἓκστ
 ă
 σις: Greek ek: “out of”, “from” and
 stasis: “state of”) means “being put out of its place” and ecstasy signifies a
 state of rapture where memory is lost and transcendence to a non-corporeal realm
 takes place. As Engberg points out: “These works create an experience of a
 place in which the text is one part, at times with surprisingly stark and
 minimalist visual expression. The ‘virtual reality’ of these works does
 not rely on high intensive graphic representation, but rather on our
 imagination and those few cues that are needed for the reader/user to
 experience the work spatiotemporally”
  [Engberg 2007, 85]. Virtual reality, which ek-stasis metaphorically
 stages, is characterized by a new way of looking if compared to photography or film
 since the perspective no longer is static; in virtual reality the
 beholder has, as it were, fallen through the frame and finds herself in a world
 completely made up of visual data. But, in Karpinska’s poem, things do not really
 work that way, since the reader can never be immersed into the graphical world. The
 reading takes place in an oscillation between presence and absence and in the midst
 of bodily interaction and decoding. By using letters instead of pictures, while
 simultaneously creating images in the form of text shaping geometrical and spatial
 formations, the work forces the reader to interact with the interface and it
 continuously stages play that oscillates between the corporeal and the
 extra-corporeal. The poem alienates traditional reading and
 emphasizes – thematically as well as formally – the necessity of touch. This is not
 an ekphrastic poem, Engberg claims, although its title could be said to allude to
 the concept.[24] This interpretation is of course plausible if the materiality of
 the printed text and the modern ekphrasis is taken as our point of
 reference. Meanwhile, it is observed how the poem stages an illusory place that is
 experienced in parallel with the reading of the text. As we will see below, a similar
 tension between presence and absence constitutes the ekphrasis of
 antiquity. Ek-stasis stages simultaneity and in N. Katherine Hayles’
 words, a feedback loop through the reader’s interaction with the work.
 According to Hayles the electronic text is processual. This means that the existence
 of a work is dependent on computer files and software that execute words of command
 and hardware that can run the software: “These digital characteristics imply that
 the poem ceases to exist as self-contained object and instead becomes a
 process, an event brought into existence when the program runs
 on the appropriate software loaded onto the right hardware”
  [Hayles 2006, 181–2]. The computer produces the text as an event and the reader’s interactions
 modify and thus determine the direction of the text, functioning like a physical
 feedback looping back to the machine admonishing it to change its behaviors. This
 feedback is a form of simultaneity that can be described as more direct than the
 experience of reading printed literature.[25]
 

 
 13

 According to Oliver Grau, immersion is a key to understanding the development of new
 media and in Virtual Art he reports the long history of
 the dream of stepping into the artwork itself. Grau’s point of departure is the
 European tradition of mural paintings, like the ones in the Villa dei Misteri in
 Pompeii, which were intended to create immersion and illusion [Grau 2003, 7]. Grau claims that “the
 expression ‘virtual reality’ is a paradox, a contradiction in terms, and it
 describes a space of possibility or impossibility formed by illusionary addresses
 to the senses.” He contends further, “the visual strategies of immersion in the virtual reality of
 the computer and its precursors in art and media history” differ
 fundamentally from imagination addressed through words, as expressed by the concept
 of ekphrasis
 [Grau 2003, 15]. Obviously, the interaction between visual,
 verbal, auditive and kinetic elements in digital literature and art puts the concept
 of ekphrasis in a different light: the visual object can be described by
 a voice or a text while also being possible to mobilize and in that way assume new
 formations. Further, the visual object may transform into a verbal formation and vice
 versa and can actually be staged when the reader or user to a higher degree creates
 the artwork through physical actions. And even though virtual reality environments
 stage a total impression of the image, the user is still interacting with interfaces
 in the form of a headmounted display, goggles and gloves.[26] Just as Grau describes
 the characteristics of VR and immersion as a space of possibility and impossibility,
 the ancient ekphrasis is dependent on an “as-if-presentness.” In
 Quintilian’s description of enargeia an “as if” (quam
 si) always figures: enargeia is about illusion and takes place
 in an ongoing tension between presence and absence [Webb 2009, 168–9]. It is this oscillation or process of visualization that is of
 interest here, not the representation of the object. The opposition between what is
 seen and what is imagined is misleading. Even advanced VR-systems where the spectator
 is exposed to a full visual presence could be said to play on an
 “as-if-presentness.” In “There Are No Visual
 Media”, W. J. T. Mitchell maintains that the term “visual media” is
 misleading since it is so strongly associated with vision. He asserts that the visual
 is intimately linked with other senses like hearing and touch. But this, he states,
 does not include the ekphrasis: 
 
 The crucial role of ekphrasis, however, is that the
 “other” medium, the visual graphic, or plastic object, is never made
 visible or tangible except by way of the medium of language. One
 might call ekphrasis a form of nesting without touching or suturing, a kind of
 action-at-distance between two rigorously separated sensory and semiotic tracks,
 one that requires completion in the mind of the reader. This is why poetry remains
 the most subtle master-medium of the sensus communis, no matter how
 many spectacular multimedia inventions are devised to assault our collective
 sensibilities. [Mitchell 2007, 402]
 

 
 

 
 14

 This could be true if we assume the modern print-based definition and do not take
 qualities, such as tactility, immediacy and aurality, of the multisensory qualities
 of the ancient ekphrasis into consideration. However, Mitchell does
 argue that all media are mixed media and in their realization depend
 upon all the senses. In a complex media ecology the verbal is not simply verbal but
 is also intimately connected with the senses and other medial expressions. The
 occurrence of visual elements in VR-environments, digital art and literature, could,
 with Bolter, Ryan and Grau, be said to deny, or make ekphrasis a redundant concept,
 but this is only if we apply the print-based definition of the term and do not take
 the immediacy, performativity and multisensory circumstances of rhetoric into
 account. One reason why theorists make no difference between the rhetorical and the
 printed ekphrasis and argue that ekphrasis is redundant
 within new media art could be discussed in the light of Guillory’s analysis of the
 origin of the media concept, where he argues that a current problem with the media
 concept is related to how “[c]ultural
 disciplines founded on the older scheme of the fine arts […] manifest a falsely
 residual character because they remain theoretically unintegrated into the system
 of the media”
 [Guillory 2010, 360]. To stimulate cultural disciplines that are
 founded on the older scheme of the arts it is of importance not only to discuss,
 analyze and understand non-digital artifacts in relation to “older technologies”
 (for example how print technology influenced the novel and the concept of genre),
 but
 also to investigate how the digital perspective could challenge theory, method and
 our view on history. Guillory again: “If
 a new instauration of the cultural disciplines is to be attempted, it is all the
 more necessary that scholars of culture strongly resist relegating the traditional
 arts to the sphere of antiquated technologies, the tacit assumption in the losing
 competition between literature and the new media”
  [Guillory 2010, 361]. Consequently, it is vital to understand
 digital culture and technology, not only as the latest and currently predominant
 technology, but also as a critical perspective that could revitalize media historical
 approaches in the traditional disciplines. And naturally, it is equally important
 to
 let older media theory (rhetoric for example) influence analyses of digital
 culture.

 

 
 
 
 Screen

 
 15

 In her Representations: Images of the World in Ciceronian
 Oratory, Ann Vasaly stresses the importance of place and the occasional
 presence of the visual object in Ciceronian oratory: “a study of Cicero’s references to the visual environment
 show that, in fact, such references frequently depend for their success upon an
 audience’s imaginative reconstruction of an event”
  [Vasaly 1993, 129]. The difference between a verbally constructed
 scene and the one where the audience could gaze at, for example, the scene of a
 crime, is a matter of degree. However, the goal for an orator was not mainly to
 describe the visual object, but was rather about the process of
 visualization and of how he led his “audience to a predictable emotional and intellectual stance”
  [Vasaly 1993, 104]. This type of visual setting when the images
 could be said to set in motion a variety of imaginative, emotional, and rational
 reactions in motion, even before a voice starts to speak, characterizes the
 interactive installation Screen.[27]
 Screen problematizes language’s ability to represent
 memory and it does so through the orchestration of an aesthetics that combines oral,
 print and digital communication strategies. The user can listen to words, read words
 and touch words. Words are read out loud, they are displayed in temporal sequence
 on
 a page-like wall, but they also move around in a three dimensional space. Screen is created and can be viewed in a CAVE environment,
 typically a four-surfaced room that includes three walls and a floor display. Text
 or
 graphics can be projected on to the three surrounding walls as well as to the floor.
 When the reader enters the cave wearing goggles and gloves a text is displayed at
 one
 of the walls as well as read out loud by a male speaker. Words that sometimes feel
 “so vivid […] that we feel we can almost
 reach out and touch them” could not only be read as a description of
 enargeia, but also become enacted in a literal way when the words
 start to peel away from the walls and float freely in the space that surrounds the
 reader. She can try to put them back in place with the data glove but it becomes
 increasingly difficult when the words are detaching themselves faster and faster.
 This could be compared to Ruth Webb’s description of ekphrasis as words
 being a force acting on a listener [Webb 2009]. Eventually, when too
 many words are floating around the reader, the rest come off and the texts collapse.
 

 
 16

 As Roberto Simanowski points out, Screen raises
 questions about memory and place: “[…]
 what […] defines memory. Is it what is stored in an external medium or what one
 carries around in the mind?”
 [Simanowski 2011, 46] Put differently, Screen raises questions about the spatiality of memory recollection. The
 mnemonic system developed in the ancient period is based on loci, the placement of
 allegorical images within constructed mental architectures such as a building or a
 landscape ([Carruthers 2008], [Yates 2010]).
 Memoria and the practice of loci communes thus stressed
 the importance of linking spatiality to memory images [Quintilian 1953, 11, Ii]
 sqq. Screen brings the close connection
 between visualization and memory in ancient theories and techniques of memorization
 to the fore. Memory and meaning are temporarily established through the bodily
 interaction with words that peel off and are put back in place. But the words keep
 coming off at an increasing speed, which places the reader in a constant tension
 between presence and absence, between significance and non-significance. As we have
 seen, a similar tension between presence and absence constitutes the rhetorical
 ekphrasis. Webb explains: “The audience (whether readers, listeners, viewers or spectators) combine a state
 of imaginative and emotional involvement in the worlds represented with an
 awareness that these worlds are not real”
 [Webb 2009, 168–9]. The oscillation between presence and absence has
 points of contact also with enargeia and the rhetorical
 ekphrasis, which accentuates the tension present in all reading
 between being situated and physically anchored, while creating presence in the
 fictive universe that we attempt to visualize while reading. 

 
 17

 A defining feature of the rhetorical ekphrasis was not just an efficient
 use of verbal description, but concerned also immediacy and immersion through the
 senses. In Progymnasmata, Hermogenes describes ekphrasis as
 an expression that brings about sight through sound: “Virtues (aretai) of an ecphrasis are, most of all, clarity
 (saphêneia) and vividness (enargeia); for the expression should almost create
 seeing through hearing”
  [Kennedy, ed. 2003, 65]. The auditive dimension of
 ekphrasis has been lost in the modern definition, but was of course
 an important element in the rhetorical situation. The audible features of
 Screen could be compared to the speaker as guide showing the listener
 around. The spoken words direct the reader’s attention towards the text and the
 speakers lead the reader through the work. Again, let us read the definition of
 ekphrasis as it could be translated: “Ekphrasis is a descriptive [periegematikos] speech which
 brings [literally ‘leads’] the thing shown vividly before the eyes”
 [Webb 2009, 51]. Periegematikos is an adjective that
 equals the speaker with a guide showing the listener around the sight –
 “shows its audience around, gives it a
 tour”
 [Webb 2009, 54].[28] Quintilian also writes about how visual impressions aroused by
 enargeia
 “makes us seem not so much to narrate
 as to exhibit the actual scene while our emotions will be no less actively stirred
 than if we were present at the actual occurrence”
 [Quintilian 1953, 6.2.32]. Thus, in a successful
 ekphrasis, the scene is not so much narrated as exhibited, and Ruth
 Webb describes the rhetorical situation as a theater or exhibition: “Drawn as they are from different domains, these
 metaphors all suggest slightly different relationships between speaker, addressee
 and referent: the subject matter may be ‘brought’ into the presence of the
 audience (speaker as theatrical producer), or the audience may be led around the
 subject (speaker as tour guide)”
  [Webb 2009]. Interactive installations and virtual reality art have
 evolved from and in relation to architecture, sculpture and performance and these
 artworks are realized in virtual spheres that generate tangible spatial experiences;
 however, Hellenistic visual art and poetry also created modes of viewing in order
 to
 involve and integrate viewers and readers visually as well as spatially into
 compositions.[29]
 

 
 18

 In the digital ekphrasis, emphasis is moved from the problem of
 representing a visual object with words, to the user’s bodily interaction with an
 environment, her relational experience where the words act as a quasi-physical force
 acting upon her.[30] Digital interfaces direct attention to the physical interaction
 and to the materiality of the work, and thus encourage a rediscovery of a
 bodily/tactile and multisensory experience in relation also to non-digital artifacts.
 That reading takes place, and always has, in a tension between the corporeal, the
 spatial and the metaphorical goes without saying, but digital works inevitably
 foreground and refocus the relation between immediate and embodied touch, since the
 reader is so distinctly inscribed in its structure through the active feedback loop
 [Scarry 1999]. The print-based definitions of ekphrasis
 often disregard the immediacy that was its condition in antiquity. Immediacy is
 characteristic of processual electronic literature, which at the same time demands
 of
 its user a more painstaking interpretative or decoding practice. Both Ek-stasis and Screen stage
 immediacy, or a direct feedback loop through the reader’s interaction
 with the work. Without drawing a direct analogy between the ancient and the
 contemporary view of the reader/listener it could be illuminating to bring out the
 ancient rhetor’s emphasis on involving the listener in the course of events. Webb
 writes: “To emphasize the rhetorical nature
 of ekphrasis is also to draw attention to the vestigial orality of
 the phenomenon, the way in which the discussions of both ekphrasis
 and enargeia assume live interactions between speaker and audience,
 with language passing like an electrical [sic] charge between them”
  [Webb 2009, 129]
 

 

 
 
 
 Digital Ekprhasis

 
 19

 During the last years a substantial critique of the hegemony of vision in our western
 cultural heritage has surfaced.[31] Indeed, sight was
 considered the noblest of senses during antiquity, which we find in the writings of
 for example Heraclitus, Plato and Aristotle. However, the emphasis on aurality and
 physical engagement was also important in the oral, rhetorical situation. In The Senses of Touch, Mark Paterson has shown how Greek
 histories of measurement were multisensory and dependent on the body. Paterson
 writes: 
 
 Before it becomes an abstracted,
 visual set of symbols on a surface, at one stage geometry involved the actual
 bodily process of measuring space. In the measuring process, the hands, feet, eyes
 and body are all involved in spatial apprehension and perception. Spatial
 relations mediated through the body become represented in abstract form through a
 set of visual symbols. As we know, such visual symbols become part of a whole
 system of representation, geometry, which is subtracted from the original,
 embodied measuring process. [Paterson 2007, 60]
 

 
 

 
 20

 The development of geometry into an abstract form also meant an active forgetting
 of
 the senses, which implies a move from “the variability of the senses and sensory experience to the static invariability
 of a desensualized, abstract space”
  [Paterson 2007, 65]. This is, according to Paterson, symptomatic
 for the way the body has been written out of the cultural history of the West and
 instead emphasis has been put on the visual sense. The development of geometry
 represents a parallel to the way printing technology has cemented the concept of
 ekphrasis to something that is concerned with ocular scrutiny only,
 and as a consequence ekphrasis has been described as a redundant
 critical tool for analyzing digital artifacts. The digital ekphrasis,
 though, could be used as a critical device that picks up immediacy and tactility,
 that were so central during antiquity, and by doing so rejects discourses that try
 to
 transcend the body. Taking touch and physical interaction into account could then
 enable a reactivating of all the senses in analyses of earlier (print-bound)
 ekphrastic practice as well. As we have seen, in antiquity ekphrasis was
 an important link to creating the desired intimate communication situation between
 speaker and listener, and the emphasis on all the bodily senses played a crucial
 role. Digital interactive installations foreground the importance of space in a
 similar sense to how ancient rhetoric was based on its performance in particular
 (public) spaces – such as the agora and the stage – or with Mary Carruthers: “[T]he heart of rhetoric, as of all art,
 lies in its performance; it proffers both visual spectacle and verbal dance to an
 audience which is not passive but an actor in the whole experience, like the
 chorus in a drama”
  [Carruthers 2010a, 2]. By uncovering the past through the digital
 interfaces, it becomes clear how the printed ekphrasis is permeated with
 assumptions grounded in analyses of printed literature. Not only has this led to a
 dismissal of ekphrasis in relation to digital artifacts, the hegemony of
 the modern definition has according to Hewlett Koelb also “given us a distorted filter through which to perceive
 ecphrases in earlier literature”
  [Hewlett Koelb 2006, 4] A revision of the concept could help us
 discover overlooked aspects of ekphrasis in relation to earlier examples
 as well, or in other words, the digital as perspective could introduce new ways of
 reading that could defamiliarize — affirm, correct or overturn — our approach to
 literature, or, rather, to printed texts.

 
 21

 As shown by the discussions above, it seems possible to re-interpret the concept of
 ekphrasis through digital interfaces and, in a wider sense, this
 shows the importance and fruitfulness of reassessing older, traditional literary
 practices and categories. If ekphrasis is discussed in accordance with
 its rhetorical function, the focus on the representations of the subject matter and
 the detailed comparison between text and image become less interesting, and
 ekphrasis turns into a productive tool for discussing digital
 artifacts as well as a basis for the re-interpretation of printed texts (not the
 least would it be interesting to re-examine a canonized print ekphrasis
 like Keats “Ode…”). It reveals the illusion of a
 static fixing of boundaries between image and text and demonstrates how the
 rhetorical non-text based ekphrasis with its call for interaction and
 tactility stages dissolution of traditional forms. Rereading the printed
 ekphrasis by way of the ancient emphasis on enargeia and
 the immediacy of the rhetorical multisensory situation, and further taking into
 consideration the dependence upon physical interaction of digital works, the process
 of visualization or, differently put, the constant tension between presence and
 absence together with physical interaction, becomes the constituting factor of
 ekphrasis. By exploring tactical and auditive aspects in relation to
 ancient rhetoric and digital interfaces, one can also begin to ask with Paterson
 “whether it is possible to go beyond
 the ocular centric in traditional aesthetic and literary practices, and consider
 other modes of experience and forms of attention, such as those made available by
 touch”
  [Paterson 2007]. Further, the digital interface as a critical lens
 could renegotiate rhetorical and aesthetic theories, but also offer new ways to think
 about the specificity of print – for example, to see the printed codex as an
 interactive object rather than a static artifact.[32] Or, in other words, to re-discover written and
 printed language and, as a consequence, Humanities as such. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 Notes

 [1]  Compare the title of
 Mark B. N. Hansen’s chapter “Seeing through the Hand”
 in [Hansen 2006].

 [2]  See for example [Morris 1995], [Weddle 2010], [Alcock and Osborne, eds. 1994].

 [3]  Huhtamo writes, “We could speak of
 ‘tactiloclasms’ – cases where physical touching is not only absent,
 but expressly prohibited and suppressed”
  [Huhtamo 2008, 75]. The emphasis on sight in western cultural practices is well documented.
 See e.g. [Paterson 2007], [Classen 1993], [Crary 1990]
 [Jay 1993], [Huhtamo 2006, 17–21].

 [4]  Mark B. N. Hansen has
 written extensively about how digital environments profoundly has affected
 embodied meaning. See for example Mark B. N. Hansen, [Hansen 2004],
 [Hansen 2006]. I am aware of the distinction between body and
 embodiment, where the former concept was introduced by theorists to establish a
 difference between the body as a static and biological given concept and the body
 as a historically situated experience. Here I use “body,” but in the sense of
 “embodiment.” For a discussion about body and embodiment, see also [Hayles 1999].

 [5] 
 This article is grounded on Ruth Webb’s distinction between the modern and ancient
 ekphrasis, see [Webb 2009], but to emphasise the
 influence of printing technology on ekphrasis during the last
 centuries I have chosen to use the printed ekphrasis and the
 rhetorical ekphrasis. There are other scholars that have noted a modern
 tendency to associate ekphrasis with art only, see for example [Maguire 1981], [Hewlett Koelb 2006].

 [6]  James A. W. Heffernan writes: “Twentieth century ekphrasis
 springs from the museum, the shrine where all poets worship in a secular
 age.”
  [Heffernan 1993, 138]
 

 [7]  I should already here hasten to add
 that the aim of this study is not to attempt to account for the reader’s
 perception, but for the reading strategies that are inscribed in the work. 

 [8]  For a discussion about the delicate difference between
 digital literature and art, see [Simanowski 2011]. 

 [9]  Heffernan also emphasis the
 rivalry between the art forms: ”Because it verbally represents visual art,
 ekphrasis stages a contest between rival modes of representation: between the
 driving force of the narrating word and the stubborn resistance of the fixed
 image” [Heffernan 1993, 6].

 [10]  See for example [Bruhn 2000], [Stewart 2006], [Bolter 1996].

 [11] This has been observed by other scholars, see for example [Bartsch 1989]. However in the third edition of The Oxford Classical Dictionary, ekphrasis is described
 as “an extended and detailed literary
 description of any object, real or imaginary”
  [Oxford Classic Dictionary 1996].

 [12]  This is also emphasized in the Greek sources, and Nikolaos writes
 about the difference between descriptive speech and ekphrasis where
 the latter “tries to make the hearers
 into spectators”, see [Kennedy, ed. 2003, 127].

 [13]  Ruth Webb writes about how
 Quintilian in the Institutio Oratoria compares the
 simple description of fact with the ekphrastic description and how differently
 they influence the listener on a physical plane: “The plain statement reaches only the ears while the vivid version, the
 equivalent of ekphrasis, ‘displays the subject to the eyes of the mind’
 ” and how “The Latin distinguishes between inner
 and outer senses of sight, where our Greek sources do not”
  [Webb 2009, 98] .

 [14] 
 [Zanker 1981]; [Quintilian 1953, 4.2.63–65]
 (evidentia, enargeia); [Quintilian 1953, 123]
 (rerum imago); [Quintilian 1953, VI.2.32]
 (enargeia); [Quintilian 1953, 8.3.61–71]
 (enargeia, evidentia, repraesentatio).

 [15]  For a difference between poetic and rhetorical
 phantasia, see Quintilian 6.2.29-32.

 [16]  Aristotle, On Memory and
 Recollection, 450a, 30-32; [Webb 2009, 111–113]. For
 a discussion about phantasia and memoria see also [Carruthers 2008], especially chapter “Models for
 the Memory.”
 

 [17]  For example, both Quintilian and Longinos are
 concerned with the effect on the listener, rather than the ontological status of
 the subject of the visions [Webb 2009, 95, 118].

 [18]  This has also been emphasized by Mary Carruthers:
 Enargeia addresses not just the eyes, but all the senses. It is
 easy to forget this when we read rhetoric texts, because the emphasis is so much
 on the visual sense. But the visual leads on to and is accompanied by an
 engagement of all the other senses in a meticulously crafted fiction.” See [Carruthers 1998, 132].

 [19]  See also [Yates 2010, 20]: “Ancient memories…could depend on faculties of intense
 visual memorization which we have lost.”
 

 [20]  In Remediation Bolter and Grusin
 describe both the ancient and modern ekphrases as “literary descriptions of works of
 art”
  [Bolter and Grusin 1999, 45]. However, in Progymnasmata,
 ekphrasis is just mentioned in passing when general subject
 matters are listed. Works of art have no special status. However, in a recent
 essay Aaron Kashtan argues that interactive fiction can be analysed within the
 same literary tradition as for example visual prose and ekphrastic textuality. See
 “Because It’s Not There: Ekphrasis and the Threat of
 Graphics in Interactive Fiction,”
 Digital Humanities Quarterly, 2011:5.1, https://dhq.digitalhumanities.org/vol/5/1/000101/000101.html. The
 term digital ekphrasis has been used by Lanfranco Aceti in his dissertation European Avant-Garde: Art, Borders and Culture in Relationship to
 Mainstream Cinema and New Media
 [Aceti 2005]. 

 [21] See also [Grau 2003, 15].

 [22]  Here I want to
 emphasize the fact that classicists were early adopters of digital technology and
 have consequently been at the forefront of digital humanities research. Early and
 ambitious projects – both from 1972 - within the field are the Thesaurus Lingua Graecae and The
 Lexicon of Greek Personal Names. See [Crane 2004, 47–55]; [Bodard and Mahony 2011]. Other important projects are
 creations of digital 3D-models and digital archives such as Rome Reborn: A Digital Model of Ancient Rome at University of Virginia
 (http://www.romereborn.virginia.edu/); Digital Romanum Forum
 at UCLA (http://dlib.etc.ucla.edu/projects/Forum);
 Stanford Digital Forma Urbis Romae Project at Stanford University (http://formaurbis.stanford.edu/), to mention just a few. Other efforts have
 shown how working in digital environments – such as the visualizing and analyzing
 of geospatial information – could offer a re-thinking of a concept such as
 “space.” See [Dunn 2011, 53–69].

 [23] 
 http://epc.buffalo.edu/ezines/lume/moment1/karpinska/. In Maria
 Engberg’s highly relevant dissertation, Born Digital. Writing
 Poetry in the Age of New Media, a CD that includes a clip of ek-stasis accompanies the book. 

 [24] 
 “The poem ‘ek-stasis’, however, does not seem to be a verbal description of
 an art object. Indeed, if anything, ‘ek-stasis’
 is the object, the house.”
  [Engberg 2007, 48].

 [25]  Of course, already Marshall McLuhan
 associated simultaneity with the instant speed of electricity, in opposition to
 the sequential logic of print. See [McLuhan 1964].

 [26]  There is also the
 case of augmented reality where the computer is not drawing the whole visual scene
 but augment the user’s view of the physical world. 

 [27]  By Noah
 Wardrip-Fruin together with Josh Carroll, Robert Coover, Shawn Greenlee, Andre
 McLain and Benjamin Shine. Screen was first shown in
 2003, a later version was made for SIGGRAPH in 2007. 

 [28]  This could be compared to the rhetorical
 concept of ductus that: “analyse the experience of artistic form as an
 ongoing, dynamic process rather than as the examination of a static or
 completed object. Ductus is the way by which a work leads someone through
 itself.” See [Carruthers 2010, 214]
 

 [29]  See [Wands 2006] and [Zanker 2003, 27].

 [30]  In this context it would be highly relevant to also discuss
 the concept of performativity (actio, pronuntiatio) that lies at the heart of
 rhetoric. In a forthcoming article I discuss how rhetorical actio
 (the realization of a speech by vocalization and accompanying physical
 movements) in digital literature and art is performed by the user rather than the
 speaker.

 [31] See footnote 3.

 [32] That digitalization offers the
 possibility to re-examine the notion of the printed codex-bound book have among
 others Jerome McGann, Johanna Drucker and Andrew Piper shown. On this view, the
 codex book is distinguished by being a “program” that “does” and
 “executes” rather than a static artifact and in that sense constitutes a
 prerequisite of digital programming: both are distinguished by performativity.
 McGann writes that a book is never “self-identical” – it does not stand in
 opposition to digital literature’s presupposed openness and performativity; it
 does not close upon itself as a static, life-less artifact. See [McGann 2001, xi], [Drucker 2009], [Piper 2009].

 

 
 Works Cited

 Aceti 2005 Aceti, Lafranco. European Avant-Garde: Art, Borders and Culture in Relationship to
 Mainstream Cinema and New Media (dissertation). London: University of the
 Arts London, 2005.

 Alcock and Osborne, eds. 1994 Alcock,
 S. and R. Osborne (eds.) Placing the Gods: Sanctuaries and
 Sacred Space in Ancient Greece. Oxford: Clarendon, 1994.

 Bartsch 1989 Bartsch, Shadi. Decoding the Ancient Novel: The Reader and Role of Description in
 Heliodorus and Achilles Tatius. Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press,
 1989.

 Becker 1995 Becker, Andrew Sprague.
 The Shield of Achilles and the Poetics of Ekphrasis.
 Lanham, Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield, 1995.

 Bodard and Mahony 2011 Bodard,
 Gabriel, and Samuel Mahony, eds. Digital Research in the Study
 of Classical Antiquity. Farnham; Ashgate, 2011.

 Bolter 1996 Bolter, Jay David.
 Ekphrasis, Virtual Reality and the Future of Writing, The
 Future of the Book, ed. Geoffrey Nunberg. Berkeley: Univ. of California
 Press, 1996. p. 253–272

 Bolter and Grusin 1999 Bolter, Jay
 David, and Richard Grusin. Remediation: Understanding New
 Media. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999.

 Bruhn 2000 Bruhn, Siglind. Musical Ekphrasis: Composers Responding to Poetry and
 Painting. Hillsdale, N.Y.: Pendragon, 2000.

 Carruthers 1998 Carruthers,
 Mary. The Craft of Thought. Meditation, Rhetoric, and the Making
 of Images, 400–1200. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998.

 Carruthers 2008 Carruthers,
 Mary. The Book of Memory: Second Edition. Cambridge:
 Cambridge University Press, 2008.

 Carruthers 2010 Mary
 Carruthers, “The Concept of Ductus, Or Journeying through a Work
 of Art,”
 Rhetoric Beyond Words. Delight and Persuasion in the Arts of the
 Middle Ages, ed. Mary Carruthers. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2010.
 p. 214

 Carruthers 2010a Carruthers, Mary. “Editor’s Introduction.”
 Rhetoric Beyond Words: Delight and Persuasion in the Arts of the
 Middle Ages. Ed. Mary Carruthers. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
 2010.

 Classen 1993 Classsen, Constance.
 Worlds of Senses: Exploring the Senses in History and Across
 Cultures. London: Routledge, 1993.

 Classen 2005 Classen, Constance.
 “Touch in the Museum.”
 The Book of Touch. Ed. Constance Classen. Oxford and New
 York: Berg, 2005. 275-286.

 Clüver 1997 Clüver, Claus. “Ekphrasis Reconsidered: On Verbal Representations of Non-Verbal
 Texts.”
 Interart Poetics: Essays on the Interrelations of the Arts and
 Media. Eds. Ulla Britta Lagerroth, Hans Lund, Erik Hedling. Amsterdam:
 Rodopi, 1997.

 Crane 2004 Crane, Greg. “Classics and the Computer: An End of the History”. A Companion to Digital Humanities, eds. Susan Schreibman,
 Ray Siemens and John Unsworth. Oxford: Blackwell, 2004.

 Crary 1990 Crary, Jonathan. Techniques of the Observer: On Vision and Modernity in the
 Nineteenth Century. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1990.

 Denham 2010 Denham, Robert D. Poets on Paintings: A Bibliography. Jefferson, North
 Carolina: McFarland & Company

 Drucker 2009 Drucker, Johanna.
 SpecLab: Digital Aesthetics and Projects in Speculative
 Computing. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009.

 Dunn 2011 Dunn, Stuart. Space as an Artefact: A Perspective on “Neogeography” from the
 Digital Humanities.
 Digital Research in the Study of Classical Antiquity,
 ed. Gabriel Bodard and Simon Mahony. Farnham; Ashgate, 2011.

 Eidt 2007 Eidt, Laura M. Sager. Writing and Editing the Painting: Ekphrasis in Literature and
 Film. Amsterdam: Rodopi, 2008.

 Engberg 2007 Engberg, Maria. Born Digital: Writing Poetry in the Age of New Media, diss.
 Uppsala: Uppsala University, 2007. 

 Grau 2003 Grau, Oliver. Visual Art: From Illusion to Immersion. Cambridge,
 Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 2003. 

 Guillory 2010 Guillory, John.
 “Genesis of the Media Concept.”
 Critical Inquiry. 36.2 (Winter 2010). 321-362.

 Hansen 2004 Hansen, Mark B.N. New Philosophy for New Media. Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT
 Press, 2004.

 Hansen 2006 Hansen, Mark B.N. Bodies in Code. Interfaces with Digital Media. New York
 & London: Routledge, 2006.

 Hayles 1999 Hayles, N. Katherine.
 How We Became Posthuman. Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics,
 Literature, and Informatics. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1999.

 Hayles 2006 Hayles, N. Katherine.
 “The Time of Digital Poetry: From Object to Event.”
 New Media Poetics, Contexts, Technotexts, and Theories.
 Eds. Adalaid Kirby Morris and Thomas Swiss. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press,
 2006. 181-209.

 Heffernan 1993 Heffernan, James
 A. W. Museum of Words: The Poetics of Ekphrasis from Homer to
 Ashbery. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993.

 Hewlett Koelb 2006 Hewlett Koelb, Janice. The Poetics of Description: Imagined
 Places in European Literature. New York: Palgrave MacMillan, 2006.

 Huhtamo 2006 Huhtamo, Erkki. “
 ‘Shaken hands with statues…’: On Art, Interactivity and Tactility”.
 Second Natures. Faculty Exhibitions of the UCLA
 Design-Media Arts Department. Los Angeles: Univ. of California, 2006. p.
 17–21.

 Huhtamo 2008 Huhtamo, Erkki. “Twin-Touch-Test-Redux: Media Archaeological Approach to Art,
 Interactivity, and Tactility.”
 MediaArtHistories. Ed. Oliver Grau. Cambridge,
 Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 2008. 71-101.

 Jay 1993 Jay, Martin. Downcast Eyes: The Denigration of Vision in Twentieth Century French
 Thought. Berkeley: The Univ. of California Press, 1993.

 Kashtan 2011 Kashtan, Aaron. “Because It’s Not There: Ekphrasis and the Threat of Graphics in
 Interactive Fiction,”
 Digital Humanities Quarterly, 2011:5.1, https://dhq.digitalhumanities.org/vol/5/1/000101/000101.html.

 Kennedy, ed. 2003 
 Progymnasmata: Greek Textbooks of Prose Composition, Translated
 into English with Introductions and Notes. Ed. George A. Kennedy. Atlanta:
 Society of Biblical Literature, 2003.

 Krieger 1992 Krieger, Murray.
 Ekphrasis: The Illusion of the Natural Sign.
 Baltimore and London: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1992.

 Longinos 1991 Longinos. On Great Writing (On the Sublime). Trans. G. M. A. Grube.
 Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company, 1991.

 Maguire 1981 Maguire, Henry. Art and Eloquence in Byzantium. Princeton: Princeton Univ.
 Press, 1981.

 Marinetti 1924 Marinetti, F. T.
 “Tactilism” (1924). Manifesto: A
 Century of isms. Ed. Mary Ann Caws. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press,
 2001. 197–200.

 McGann 2001 McGann, Jerome J. Radiant Textuality. Literature after the World Wide Web.
 Palgrave: McMillan, 2001.

 McLuhan 1964 McLuhan, Marshall.
 Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man. London:
 Routledge, 1964.

 Mitchell 1995 Mitchell, W. J. T.
 Picture Theory: Essays on Verbal and Visual
 Representation. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press,
 1995.

 Mitchell 2007 Mitchell, W. J. T.
 “There Are No Visual Media.”
 MediaArtHistories. Ed. Oliver Grau. Cambridge,
 Massuchusetts: The MIT Press, 2007. 395-406.

 Morris 1995 Morris, Sarah P. Daidalos and the Origins of Greek Art Princeton: Princeton
 Univ. Press, 1995.

 Oxford Classic Dictionary 1996 
 The Oxford Classical Dictionary. Oxford; Clarendon
 Press, 1970.

 Paterson 2007 Paterson, Mark.
 The Senses of Touch: Haptics, Affects and
 Technologies. Oxford, New York: Berg, 2007.

 Piper 2009 Andrew Piper, Dreaming in Books. The Making of the Bibliographic Imagination in
 the Romantic Age. Chicago: The Univ. of Chicago Press, 2009.

 Quintilian 1953 Quintilian.
 Institutio Oratoria, with an English translation by H. E.
 Butler. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1953.

 Ryan 2011 Ryan, Marie-Laure. Narrative as Virtual Reality: Immersion and Interactivity in
 Literature and Electronic Media. Baltimore and London: The Johns Hopkins
 University Press, 2001.

 Scarry 1999 Scarry, Elaine. Dreaming by the Book. New York: Farrar, Strauss and Giroux,
 1999.

 Scholz 1998 Scholz, Bernard F. “
 ‘Sub Oculos Subiectio’: Quintilian on Ekphrasis
 and Enargeia.”
 Pictures into Words: Theoretical and Descriptive Approaches to
 Ekphrasis. Ed. Valerie Kay Robillard and Els Jongeneel. Amsterdam: VU
 University Press, 1998. 73-99.

 Simanowski 2011 Simanowski,
 Roberto. Digital Art and Meaning: Reading Kinetic Poetry, Text
 Machines, Mapping Art, and Interactive Installations. Minneapolis:
 University of Minnesota Press, 2011.

 Spitzer 1962 Spitzer, Leo. “The ‘Ode on a Grecian Urn,’ or Content vs. Metagrammar.”
 Essays on English and American Literature. Ed. Anna
 Hatcher. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1962.

 Stewart 2006 Garrett Stewart,
 The Look of Reading: Book, Painting, Text. Chicago
 & London: Univ. of Chicago Press, 2006.

 Vasaly 1993 Vasaly, Ann. Representations: Images of the World in Ciceronian Oratory.
 Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993.

 Wands 2006 Wands, Bruce. Art of the Digital Age. London: Thames & Hudson,
 2006.

 Webb 2009 Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory
 and Practice. Farnham, England: Ashgate, 2009.

 Weddle 2010 Weddle, Polly. Touching the Gods: Physical Interaction with Cult Statues in the
 Roman World Durham: Durham Univ., 2010. available at Durham E-Theses
 Online: http://etheses.dur.ac.uk/555/
 

 Yacobi 1999 Yacobi, Tamar. “The Ekphrastic Figure of Speech.”
 Text and Visuality: Word and Image Interaction 3. Ed.
 Martin Heusser. Amsterdam: Rodopi, 1999.

 Yates 2010 Yates, Frances A. The Art of Memory. London: Pimlico, 2010. 

 Zanker 1981 Zanker, Graham. “Enargeia in the Ancient Criticism of Poetry.”
 Rheinishces Museum N.F. 124 (1981). 297-311.

 Zanker 2003 Zanker, Graham.
 Modes of Viewing in Hellenistic Poetry and Art. Wisconsin: Univ. of
 Wisconsin Press, 2003. p. 27.

 

 2013 7.1
 |
 XML
 |
 PDF
 |
 Print
 |
 See Recommendations

 
 Recommendations

 DHQ is testing out three new article recommendation methods! Please explore the links
 below to find articles that are related in different ways to the one you just read.
 
 We are interested in how these methods work for readers—if you would like to share
 feedback with us, please complete our short evaluation survey. 
 You can also visit our documentation for these recommendation methods to learn more.

 SPECTER Recommendations

 Below are article recommendations generated by the SPECTER model:

 
 Experiential Analogies: A Sonic Digital Ekphrasis as a Digital Humanities Project,
 
 2016,
 Anna Foka, Umeå University; Viktor Arvidsson, Swedish Center for Digital Innovation.
 Department of Informatics, University of Oslo

 A Beautiful Look at Modern Digital Humanities: A review of Mark Goble, Beautiful Circuits:
 Modernism and the Mediated Life (New York: Columbia University Press, 2010),
 
 2013,
 Jimmy Butts, Clemson University

 The Idiocy of the Digital Literary (and what does it have to do with digital humanities)?,
 
 2013,
 Sandy Baldwin, West Virginia University

 Digital Caricature,
 
 2014,
 Sean Sturm, The University of Auckland; Stephen Francis Turner, The University of
 Auckland

 Because It's Not There: Ekphrasis and the Threat of Graphics in Interactive Fiction,
 
 2011,
 Aaron Kashtan, Department of English, University of Florida

 
 DHQ Keyword Recommendations

 Below are article recommendations generated by DHQ Keywords:

 
 Playing with Identities: Queering Digital Narratology and the Exploration of Gender
 and Sexual Identities,
 
 2017,
 Calvin Fung, Monash University

 A Beautiful Look at Modern Digital Humanities: A review of Mark Goble, Beautiful Circuits:
 Modernism and the Mediated Life (New York: Columbia University Press, 2010),
 
 2013,
 Jimmy Butts, Clemson University

 Graphic Sublime: On the Art and Designwriting of Kate Armstrong and Michael Tippett,
 
 2012,
 Joseph Tabbi, University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC)

 Theoretical Permutations for Reading Cybertexts: A Review of Markku Eskelinen, Cybertext
 Poetics: The Critical Landscape of New Media Literary Theory and C.T. Funkouser, New
 Directions in Digital Poetry,
 
 2013,
 Manuel Portela, University of Coimbra

 "The Globe is All One": Wars I Have Seen as Proto-Network Narrative,
 
 2011,
 Stacy Lavin, Independent Scholar

 
 TF-IDF Recommendations

 Below are article recommendations generated by the TF-IDF Model:

 
 Because It's Not There: Ekphrasis and the Threat of Graphics in Interactive Fiction,
 
 2011,
 Aaron Kashtan, Department of English, University of Florida

 Experiential Analogies: A Sonic Digital Ekphrasis as a Digital Humanities Project,
 
 2016,
 Anna Foka, Umeå University; Viktor Arvidsson, Swedish Center for Digital Innovation.
 Department of Informatics, University of Oslo

 The Literary And/As the Digital Humanities,
 
 2013,
 Jessica Pressman, ACLS Fellow; Lisa Swanstrom, Florida Atlantic University

 Introduction to the DHQ Special Issue: Digital Technology in the Study of the Past,
 
 2018,
 Anna Foka, Umeå University; Jonathan Westin, University of Gothenburg; Adam Chapman,
 University of Gothenburg

 Visualizing a Series: Aggregate Compositional Analysis of Botticelli's Commedia,
 
 2023,
 Nathaniel Corley, Amherst College

 
 

 
 This work is licensed under a
 Creative Commons Attribution-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License.
 

 

 
 
 URL: https://dhq.digitalhumanities.org/vol/7/1/000161/000161.html
 
 Comments: 
 dhqinfo@digitalhumanities.orgPublished by: 
 
 The Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations
 and 
 The Association for Computers and the HumanitiesAffiliated with: 
 Digital Scholarship in the HumanitiesDHQ has been made possible in part by the 
 National Endowment for the Humanities.
 © 2013 the author
 Unless otherwise noted, the DHQ web site and all DHQ published content are published
 under a
 Creative Commons Attribution-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License.
 Individual articles may carry a more permissive license, as described in the footer
 for the individual article, and in the article’s metadata.