# Types of Ekphrasis
# Source: Louvel - 2018 - Types of Ekphrasis.pdf
# BibTeX key: louvel_types_2018
# Zotero dir: 3117
# Extracted chars: 52680
# Format: PDF
============================================================

── PAGE 1 ──
Types of Ekphrasis:
An Attempt at Classiﬁcation
Liliane Louvel
University of Poitiers
Abstract
This article aims at offering a reassessment of ekphrasis, expanding on the
definitions in work by Tamar Yacobi and James A. W. Heffernan, to name only two.
It aims to distinguish between different types of ekphrasis according to the various
functions it may assume: narrativizing, maieutic, hermeneutic, subversive, elegiac, and
affective. Ekphrasis has undergone a new turn in our digital age and is even more
widespread than before, since it is no longer confined to books. The word/image
relationship has become more broadly part of our everyday life. This article argues
that reception theory and the phenomenology of reading and viewing must be taken
into account in analyzing this new experience of a digital virtual world. The emergence
of a mental image conjured up by the word/image interaction plays a role not only
in our cognitive but also in our bodily experience. I propose that the interaction and
oscillation between the page or the screen (the receiving device) on which the ekphrasis
appears and our mind’s eye generates a blend that I call the “pictorial third” as a means
of accounting for the reading/visualizing experience.
Keywords
ekphrastic moment, reading event, phenomenology, pictorial third
The “pictorial turn” as theorized by W. J. T. Mitchell (1994 [1964]) and the
ever-increasing presence of intermediality in our digital age seem to require a
reassessment of the relation between word and image in general and of the
figure of ekphrasis in particular. Indeed, not only literature, its original locus,
but sociocultural productions such as newspapers, cinema, television, digital
photography or social networks make rethinking the word/image relation-
Poetics Today 39:2 ( June 2018)
DOI 10.1215/03335372-4324432
q 2018 by Porter Institute for Poetics and Semiotics
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/245/528854/0390245.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 01 October 2025


── PAGE 2 ──
ship necessary. People have become used to media-mixing, and literature has
followed suit, experimenting with new uses of images. For instance, the trag-
edy of 9/11 and the innumerable descriptive comments on its traumatic
images reflected the intermedial turn the catastrophe fostered as multiple
kinds of media were employed in trying to make sense of it. Literature inter-
acted with the advent of visually engaged “9/11 books,” like Jonathan Safran
Foer’s Extremely Loud and Incredibly Close (2005). This novel contains images
together with their descriptions, and its end pages work like a flip-book: when
quickly leafed through they mimic the awful fall of a man. In Falling Man, Don
DeLillo also worked with the repetition of the traumatic image of the man
falling off one of the doomed Twin Towers. The intermingling of word and
image, of words commenting upon images and vice versa has become so
common a phenomenon that people do not question it any more. This is a
process that of course dates back to ancient rhetoric and in particular, the
practice of ekphrasis.
In the following I attempt a definition of ekphrasis as well as explore its
different types and functions in search of an adequate typology. In reflecting
on the effects of the word-image relationship on the reader/viewer well
attuned to information technology I evoke, in parallel to cognitive studies
and the tenets of phenomenology, the phenomenon I call the “pictorial third”
as a means of accounting for the reading/visualizing experience.
It seems necessary to start with a clear definition of ekphrasis. The classic
definition states that it “brings things literally before the eyes” (Webb 2009:
240) as an instance of enargeia (in Greek) or evidentia (in Latin). The reader is a
witness to that which is being described and which is vivid in the mind; in
terms of the omnipresent screens of “visual representation media” (Grønstad
2016: 225), we would say that it was “life-like.” Due to the ever-expanding use
of works of art in literature, over the years the term—at least in Anglophone
criticism—has come to be restricted to the description of works of art, where-
as classic ekphrasis corresponded to the wider figure of hypotyposis (the Greek
term) or descriptio (the Latin equivalent). What is the state of the art nowadays
when technology has taken such a powerful electronic and intermedial turn?
In what way have screens altered our contact with images and our links
with the world? What has changed in the context of widespread internet
access? Are we witnessing the rise of new types of inter/trans/remedial
objects? As a consequence, has ekphrasis acquired a new nature and new
functions? Can it now be conceived of as an intermedial object? There
has been a noticeable change in the position of the viewer: the monocular
Renaissance perspective has shifted to the swift display of multivisual hyper-
text and the mosaic-like presentation of objects—their presentation and no
longer their representation. Multiple synchronous images are vying for space
246
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/245/528854/0390245.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 01 October 2025


── PAGE 3 ──
on the same screen. The viewer/user has the opportunity of reading/viewing
images and their accompanying ekphrases on all kinds of screens, whether
collective (like cinema screens or huge TV screens for special sports, political
or musical occasions) or private ones (TV, computer screens, smartphones,
e-readers, etc.). How do these new technological conditions of visibility affect
ekphrasis, and does it in response adopt new modalities of appearance, new
textual shapes, and functions? Why do some types of ekphrasis survive and
others undergo alterations or become extinct? Which kinds of ekphrasis resist
the mutations of our technological, electronic, digitally influenced times and
are plastic enough to adapt?
If we agree that ekphrasis is “an aesthetic composite” (Yacobi 2005), that is,
an intermedial mixture of word and image, then it seems to be ideally suited
for the presentation of a fragmented world told in split-up narratives. The
montage-like pictures on screens actually seem to reflect our new ways of com-
municating and living, a fact literature has quickly seized upon. Ekphrasis can
imitate this quick-changing life of illusory closeness and virtuality. The mix-
ture of description and the actual presence of visual images interrupting the
flow of a text brings to the reader’s eye a horizontal rhizome-like window to
look at instead of a linear continuous narrative flow (see the work of W. G.
Sebald, Aleksandar Hemon, and many others). Word and image seem to be
in closer and more complex interrelations than the knots of Laocoo¨n’s ser-
pents. They may concur or they may differ; their relationship may be one of
redundancy, confirmation, and reassurance or, on the contrary, subversion,
destabilization, and threat.
Let me add that the word/image relationship has often been troubled by
the domination of word over image. Psychoanalysis has it that the verbal
elaboration of the work of dreams makes the image disappear; conversely,
rhetoric argues that in ekphrasis the word makes the image appear (Rousset
1990). The well-known hierarchy has also been the locus of gender issues, an
image being seen as feminine and inferior to the powerful word seen as mas-
culine (Bryson 1986).
In this article, I argue that distinguishing between different types of
ekphrasis will help us to take into account the performative aspect of visually
imbued texts (Paulson 2016: 238) and to examine “how to do things with
ekphrasis.” I propose that there is such a thing as an “ekphrastic moment,” a
textual and phenomenological duration that envelops us while reading and
gazing at the same time. This ekphrastic moment holds epistemological
potential beyond its two input domains: when an image arises in a text it
provokes “a visual reading event,” combining Louis Marin’s (1999: 33) “read-
ing event” and Sarah J. Paulson’s (2016: 241) ekphrastic “visual event.” The
Louvel
† Types of Ekphrasis
247
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/245/528854/0390245.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 01 October 2025


── PAGE 4 ──
actualization of the triadic event involving text and imagined image in the
reader’s mind gives rise to a “pictorial third” (Louvel 2010: 258–59).
Ekphrasis Challenged by the Digital
The digital screens on which flickering images appear and disappear seem
to impart to them a life and death of their own. Walter Benjamin identified
three factors necessary to produce “an accomplished work of art”: technical
evolution, the exhaustion of traditional art forms, and subtle changes in
society entailing a change in the reception mode favoring new forms of art:
Indeed, every developed art form intersects three lines of development. Technol-
ogy works toward a certain form of art. . . . Secondly, the traditional art forms in
certain phases of their development strenuously work toward effects which later
are effortlessly attained by the new ones. . . . Thirdly, unspectacular social changes
often promote a change in receptivity which will benefit the new art form. (Ben-
jamin 1969 [1936]: 249– 50)
Heconcludesthat “everyfundamentallynew, pioneering creation ofdemands
will carry beyond its goal” (ibid.: 237). The fact that the image of a painting, for
instance, is so readily accessible seems to free ekphrasis from its primary func-
tion:that of making the absent image visualizable. Hencetheaccessto internet
picturesrepresentsachallengetoekphrasis,whenprimarydescriptivefunctions
and uses may recede into the background (except in the case of “notional
ekphrasis” [Hollander 1988: 209], which has no equivalent in the world
beyond the text).
As we can have such fast and easy access to digital pictures, photographs,
graphs, maps, and so on, all kinds of writers (commentators, artists, art his-
torians, journalists, teachers, students) are encouraged to appeal to the visual
and the digital. In a world of networks, of rhizomes, and of multiplying
screens and composite pictures, the visual often develops horizontally more
than vertically. According to Gilles Deleuze, the rhizome refuses hierarchy.
There are no entry points, no differences in levels; the rhizome can be com-
pared to flat cartography rather than deep-digging archeology (Deleuze and
Guattari 1993: 20). This organizing mode tallies perfectly with word/image
onscreen, the mixing of techniques, and media. In House of Leaves, Mark
Z. Danielevski (2000) displays a variety of links, interfaces, hyperlinks, and
montages on the book page. Its typographical layout is consistent with the
storyline, which tells of the video filming of an exploration of the inside of an
ever-expanding house in an ever-expanding book. Among the huge number
of novels dealing with ekphrasis, a few, for example, Dorian by Will Self (2002)
248
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/245/528854/0390245.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 01 October 2025


── PAGE 5 ──
and What I Loved by Siri Hustvedt (2002), have already staged digitally pro-
duced works of art like videos, animated documents, or filmed installations.
It seems necessary then not to treat ekphrasis as a unified phenomenon, but
to carefully distinguish among different functions and types of ekphrasis.
Perceptual changes follow changes in the media and in the historical context,
so that different cultural periods entail different modes of reception and
seeing. Paulson quotes Marshall McLuhan’s famous catchphrases “the medi-
um is the message” and “the medium matters” (McLuhan 1964; quoted in
Paulson 2016: 253). Ekphrasis is not monomorphous and any attempt at
classifying ekphrases glosses over the frequent combination of two (or even
more) functions and types.
A certain number of attempts have already been made to differentiate
types of ekphrasis; Michele Cometa (2012), for instance, further developed
James A. W. Heffernan’s idea of “notional ekphrasis” and Laura Sager Eidt
(2008) also offered a typology. But these valuable works often concentrate on
a particular period (the German nineteenth century for Cometa, film studies
for Sager). An overview seems particularly necessary as digital practices and
information technology bring about completely unprecedented uses of word
and image.
I try to offer a detailed typology taking into account the types of ekphrasis
already described but also new ones that have emerged in recent artistic
practices. A phenomenological turn will also be necessary to account for the
effects of the different types of ekphrases on the reading experience as well as
on the often overlooked reader/viewer’s experiencing body.
Narrative Ekphrases: Ekphrasis at Work
Narrativizing Ekphrasis
Ekphrasis’s first and foremost function is that of describing an inanimate
visual object. It is thought to stall the smooth unrolling of the narrative. As
in Homer’s canonical description of Achilles’s shield, it allegedly decelerates
the story, although it is not merely a description of the shield but, as Murray
Krieger (1992) argues, the narrative of the events depicted on it, that is, a
narrative disguised as a vivid description. Economically speaking, a minimal
portion of text will be taken up by a minimal ekphrasis when the reference to a
well-known picture suffices. A minimal ekphrasis, consisting of a quick evo-
cation such as a title or a painter’s name, called “model ekphrasis” by Tamar
Yacobi (1999: 96), helps reduce the so-called descriptive chores. Of course,
detailed ekphrasis remains absolutely necessary in the case of “notional”
ekphrasis when a purely imaginary image requires words to conjure it up.
Louvel
† Types of Ekphrasis
249
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/245/528854/0390245.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 01 October 2025


── PAGE 6 ──
Beyond this classical function of ekphrasis, several others deserve attention
in our quickly changing world. In contemporary artistic expression, ekphra-
ses also occur in videos, films about artists, films about works, and montages.
All these forms allow for private verbal expressions or narratives construed
by visitors in addition to verbal explanations of visual works of art given on
the part of the artist or the curator. Ann Hamilton’s exhibition Phora at La
Maison Rouge in Paris in 2005 displayed numerous screens on a wall. On the
screens a long series of the same huge black and white mouth kept uttering
words. This was the ultimate visual/aural/verbal production rolled into one.
A leaflet took pains to describe and explain the video to the spectator (Ham-
ilton 2005: n.p.).
Hermeneutic Ekphrasis
An ekphrasis may work as a clue to signal a mystery; the reader then turns
detective and embarks on a hermeneutic quest. Yacobi’s (2005: 224) example
of “double exposure,” twinning Blake Morrison’s ekphrastic poem “Teeth”
with Robert Browning’s “My Last Duchess,” shows how, thanks to the allusion
to Francis Bacon’s The Pope in the poem, the crime the husband committed is
revealed. Ekphrasis may also contain elements alluding to an image or images
that in turn may also point to a possibly hidden story or mystery. In Ghosts by
John Banville (1993), the presence of several of Vaublin’s (actually Watteau’s)
paintings, like the detailed ekphrasis of the (unacknowledged) portrait, pushes
the reader to juxtapose it with Watteau’s painting Gilles. The “real” picture
then gives the clue to the solution of one of the story’s mysteries.
The reader may suspect the presence of a painting behind a description
thanks to linguistic markers (see Louvel 2002: 33) and thus may be led to check
and confirm his or her intuition—easily done on the web. Reading the
description of a cupboard in chapter 11 (“Containers”) of Gabriel Josipovici’s
The Goldberg Variations (2002) provokes an impression of de´ja` vu. The trace of
a possible picture concealed behind the verbal text thanks to the descriptive
linguistic choices and the visual quality of the minute description sends the
reader on a hermeneutic quest, which confirms his or her doubts. The
description is actually that of the first still life in European art painted on
wood, the anonymous Armoire au placard et aux bouteilles (1470, Colmar Museum
Unterdenlinden).
Maieutic Ekphrasis
A character may also experience the emergence of an idea or a feeling thanks
to an ekphrasis. I prefer to call this “maieutic” ekphrasis instead of using
Heffernan’s (1993: 5) term, “obstetric ekphrasis.” In Edith Wharton’s The
House of Mirth (2005), a novel strongly imbued with painting, the description
250
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/245/528854/0390245.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 01 October 2025


── PAGE 7 ──
of the impersonation of Reynold’s Mrs. Lloyd by the character Lily Bart in a
tableau vivant produces an ambiguous revelation under her lover’s eyes. Selden
is led to realize his love for Lily as well as her true character, which supersedes
her model: Mrs. Lloyd becomes Lily Bart and not the other way around. If
this is Lily Bart’s moment of triumph, it also foretells her impending doom.
Art and illusion disclose the artificiality of Lily’s character in this artistic
description of an artistic moment copying an artistic work. It is art at three
removes, revealing how false and shallow Lily really is. Wharton’s original
title for her novel, A Moment’s Ornament, supports this reading. Lily, the orna-
ment of a moment, triumphs in her “ekphrastic moment,” experiencing at
the same time her position as subject and object. She gets caught up in the
lethal power of her artificial being-as-representation.
Subversive (Debunking) Ekphrasis
Ekphrasis often achieves a performative role, as is the case in postmodern
ekphrastic writing like Michel Faber’s The Crimson Petal and the White (2011).
The novel rewrites Victorian blockbusters, adding distancing effects, meta-
lepsis, and direct address to the reader (e.g., “you will see later that . . . ”).
Ekphrasis here is part of a postmodern debunking strategy and acts upon
characters and readers alike, making one take a step back from becoming
completely engrossed in the tongue-in-cheek narrative. Meta-references in
such phrases as “Wilkie Collins my friend,” or the allusion to famous pictures
and photographs, add to the reader’s complicity with the narrator.
In this way ekphrasis can subvert and even destroy the apparent discourse
of the narrative or of popular opinion to alert the reader to ideological or
ethical implications. Julian Barnes’s first chapter of A History of the World in 10
and 1/2 Chapters (1989) is told from a worm’s point of view, thus debunking the
Bible’s narrative perspective on the Flood. His chapter dedicated to Ge´ri-
cault’s painting the Wreck of the Medusa (Barnes 1989: 125–39) mixes up art
history parlance, humor, and strident personal critical opinion, as in the
following series of interrogations: “A painting is a moment. What would we
think was happening in a scene where three sailors and a soldier were throw-
ing people off a raft into the sea? That the victims were already dead? or if
not, that they were being murdered for their jewelry?” (Barnes 1989: 129, my
italics).
Paul Durcan’s (1991) poems in Crazy about Women may be read as profana-
tion when they contradict or debunk the pictures of sacred subjects that they
purport to celebrate. This is the case for instance with “The Holy Family with
St. John” (Durcan 1991: 10–11) in which the childish St. John the Baptist has
a “trim penis” peering “out like bullfinch from a bough” and Christ and the
Virgin Mary sport “frisby halos.” This type of ekphrasis stalls reading time
Louvel
† Types of Ekphrasis
251
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/245/528854/0390245.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 01 October 2025


── PAGE 8 ──
when the reader has to check the details in the adjacent picture and may
destabilize the evidence of the visual in the text. This is also the case in
Sebald’s œuvre at times. When the image and the text are at loggerheads,
the reader can go to the internet to check the validity of the description in
cases where the image is not provided.
Anachronistic Ekphrasis
Ekphrasis may be strongly marked by the interplay between past, present,
and future. Texts that reenact the aesthetic mores of an earlier period, like the
Pre-Raphaelites’ aesthetics in The Children’s Book by A. S. Byatt, are inevitably
at variance with aesthetic choices and practices since Duchamp (the impor-
tance of the artistic gesture, installations, videos, weird objects, etc.). Tem-
poral dialectics invite ideological interrogations by the reader. In Aleksandar
Hemon’s novel The Lazarus Project (2008), the ideologically racist and xeno-
phobic tenets of the early twentieth century are foregrounded by the archive
photographs and their descriptions, which may shock today’s readers. The
ekphrasis of the photo figuring on the front page of the Tribune “is a photo of
Lazarus in profile, his eyes closed, a dark shadow over his eyes and in the
hollow of his cheeks. THE ANARCHIST TYPE the heading says: numbers
are strewn around his face. Below it, the numbers are explained” (Hemon
2008: 143). The text provides a phrenological explication of the dead man’s
face, noting that his “simian ears” demonstrate his so-called bestial ten-
dencies. This ekphrasis precedes the photograph, which appears almost a
hundred pages later.
Not only may the description of a picture (and its ideological assumptions)
seem anachronistic from today’s point of view, but conversely the text may
play on anachronism when referring to later topics or events, while the
related ekphrasis deals with visual objects of earlier date. In this case, it may
double as debunking ekphrasis. However, quite a number of novels have
recently revived Victorian materials and standpoints in a nostalgic manner;
one could cite Antonia Byatt’s work, as well as Michel Faber’s or Tracy
Chevalier’s, among others.
Ekphrasis and Emotions
Monumental or Elegiac Ekphrasis
Ekphrasis often aims to help retrieve the past, which is also one of photog-
raphy’s major functions. We could thus designate this type “monumental”
ekphrasis, for it strives to erect a monument to commemorate a person or an
event. It may also point to a trauma; ekphrasis thus can be paired with elegy
as Stephen Cheeke (2008) remarked a` propos photography, which Susan Son-
252
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/245/528854/0390245.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 01 October 2025


── PAGE 9 ──
tag called “the twilight art.” Cheeke (2008: 143) evokes “the elegiac nature of
photographic art,” for “the photographic image has something to do with
Death” and is akin to a memento mori. For Sontag (1977: 154), “a photograph is
not only an image (as a painting is an image), an interpretation of the real; it
is also a trace, something directly stenciled off the real, like a footprint or a
deathmask.” She adds with humor: “Having a photograph of Shakespeare
would be like having a nail from the True Cross.” Of course this is directly
linked to Barthes’s famous notion of Ça-a-e´te´, “It has been” (1980: 120).
A good example of elegiac ekphrasis might be found in Timothy Findley’s
The Wars (2001), a kind of monument erected to the memory of Robert Ross,
a young Canadian soldier caught up in the horror of World War I, “the war
to end all wars.” Photographs are minutely described together with their
handwritten comments. The text even mimics the inscriptions the photo-
graphs bear at the back: “You turn them over—wondering if they’ll spill—
and you read on the back in the faintest ink in a feminine hand: ‘Robert.’ But
where? . . . Then you see him: Robert Ross” (Findley 2001: 6). The inscrip-
tions in italics read, “Robert Ross and Family,” “Rowena,” “Mother and Miss
Davenport,” some with more personal comments—“Here is Meg—a Patriotic
Pony”—or exclamation marks: “This is Peggy Ross with Clinton Brown from Har-
vard!!! ” (ibid.: 6–7). Letters are also inscribed on photographs: “What is this?”
for an iceberg, or the “clipping from a paper reading ‘Longboat wins the
marathon!’” (ibid.: 12). The photographs are used to recapture subjective
experiences and the subsequent contradictory testimonies relating to the
young man’s horrendous ordeal.
“Affective” Ekphrasis
A corollary of elegiac ekphrasis might be “affective” ekphrasis, the kind of
ekphrasis that expresses a longing to merge with the object, Narcissus- or
Pygmalion-like. It expresses the desire for erotic absorption and fusion with
the world of the image or with the image itself. Absjorn Grønstad gives the
example of Point Omega by Don DeLillo, where one character wants to merge
with Hitchcock’s decelerated Psycho and live it minute by minute (Grønstad
2016: 232). We could add the character of Strether in Henry James’s The
Ambassadors (2009 [1903]), who loves the landscape of a painting by Lambinet
so much that he manages to enter it imaginatively. Climbing off the suburban
train, he walks in the French countryside as painted by Lambinet and enjoys
the feeling of recognition and reunion with a loved object. In this kind of
ekphrasis, word and image meet to provide the locus for an emotional
ekphrastic encounter.
Louvel
† Types of Ekphrasis
253
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/245/528854/0390245.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 01 October 2025


── PAGE 10 ──
Ekphrasis and Artistic Practice: Ekphrasis in the Painter’s Studio
Pragmatic or Technical Ekphrasis
This type of ekphrasis and the ones that follow may be seen as composite since
they often combine description with other issues or aims. “Pragmatic” or
“technical” ekphrasis refers to an ekphrasis focusing on the more technical
choices of an artist. Here let us rely on a painter’s words. In a notebook entry
dated December 6, 1947, the British painter Stanley Spencer wrote a very
detailed account of his work for the famous chapel at Burghclere and its
frescoes, culminating in the Altar piece, The Resurrection of the Soldiers:
The crosses throughout & the mules & limber & men in the central part of the
picture form the main basis on which the picture is built. . . . This cross was placed on
the graves or wherever men fell was placed there, as a symbol of hope for their
ultimate resurrection & redemption & was looked upon & thought of as such. . . .
the cross is one of the forms through which the state of peace has been expressed. Here
it is caressed as a sweetheart, & there it is forming a kind of door to a house so that a
soldier can re-enjoy his old days of sitting in his doorway & chatting to his neigh-
bour. It forms a home for him . . . This picture is supposed to be a reflection of the
general attitude & behaviour of men during the war. As soon as I decided in this it
seemed that every army incident was a coin, the obverse of which was presented to
me & on the unseen face of which was the Resurrection. (Spencer 2001: 142, my
italics)
While describing his work of art, Spencer clearly explains the origin of his
picking out the cross as a symbol of his experience of the war and of the death
of his comrades-in-arms. Crosses marked the place where soldiers have fallen
and became omnipresent as a haunting symbol. They also, in true Spence-
rian manner, became the mark of hope in resurrection. Therefore, the shape
of the cross becomes a necessary presence in the painting and its main compo-
sitional element. The words “basis,” “built,” “represent,” “expressed,” and
“forming forms” all point in that direction.
There are numerous examples of artists at work in literature, and writers
have taken pains to describe their technical grappling with their subjects.
A famous example is Emile Zola in L’œuvre, where he models Lantier on
Ce´zanne. Oscar Wilde staged Basil Halward painting Dorian Gray, while
in our own time, Siri Hustvedt in The Blazing World (2014) repeatedly
describes the artist in her studio and the coming to life of her installations,
videos, or boxes.
Creative Ekphrasis: The Description of a Creative Event or “Advent”
Close to “technical ekphrasis” are cases that combine description with the
advent of a creative event or inspiration. This is the phenomenological side of
254
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/245/528854/0390245.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 01 October 2025


── PAGE 11 ──
ekphrasis, reflecting processes of exchange and transaction resulting from the
“ekphrastic encounter” (Grønstad 2016: 231; Kennedy 2012) or the “infinite
dialogue” as developed by Foucault (1966).
In most of Spencer’s writings and ekphrases, art is the result of an event or
of an “advent,” of something that happened to the painter, which came to his
mind and is described in his writings as an experience. It may be a response to
a situation, to a literary event, or to a vision that triggers his desire to paint. He
often declares that he responded to something he liked and fell in love with.
This was the case with Sarah Tubb and the Heavenly Visitors (1933), as he wrote to
D. Tooth, his gallery’s owner:
Usually, in order to describe any one picture of mine it means taking a seat &
preparing to hear the story of my life. . . In the village, many years ago, lived an old
couple ( brother & sister) Tommy Tubb & Sarah Tubb. I remember them very
well & seeing them going in & out of the gate in the picture. I remember my father
describing how when one evening the “Northern Lights” . . . was very clear & vil-
lagers wondered what it was, that “Granny Tubb,” Sarah Tubb’s mother, had
knelt down in her gate & prayed . . . This is I am aware not a satisfactory or
explanatory explanation & I should think you might feel like Byron did about
Coleridge
“Explaining Metaphysics to the Nation.”
“I wish he would explain his explanation.”
But I see an old Grandmother in black kneeling in her gateway & texts lying
about & greengrocers & shopkeepers adoring. I must paint it, because I like it very
much & see it all very clearly. (Spencer 2001: 155)
This sort of text by a painter is closely related to the field of art criticism and
art history, where ekphrasis takes on a scholarly function.
Critical Ekphrasis
Art Criticism and Second-Order Ekphrasis
I would argue that such art-critical and art-historical “ekphrastic encounters”
are of the second order. First-order ekphrasis is an encounter between image
and language, or between ekphrasis and narration, or reader and ekphrasis.
Second-order ekphrasis is an encounter between two disciplines, art history
and “literature/writing on art,” dealing with an art work already once
removed from what it (re)presents. It broadens the scope of ekphrasis to
bring in the parlance of academic art criticism. A fine example is Siri Hust-
vedt, whose heterogeneous texts often verge on art history and criticism; she
even indulged in art criticism in Mysteries of the Rectangle: Essays on Painting
(2015). In The Blindfold, the enigma of the absent figure of Paris in the main
Louvel
† Types of Ekphrasis
255
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/245/528854/0390245.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 01 October 2025


── PAGE 12 ──
character Iris’s description of Giorgione’s The Tempest is posed by the text
itself. Her detailed description takes up two pages:
There’s a woman sitting on a riverbank in the foreground to the right. She’s
nursing a child not a tiny infant, a baby who also sits on the ground. One of her
arms rests on the child’s shoulder . . . And then there’s the storm which gives the
painting its curious illumination. It’s not real light but a kind of inner light, the light
of strong memories.
“Haven’t you forgotten something?”
“Have I? . . . ”
“There’s a man in the painting.” Paris answered for Sam. (Hustvedt 2003
[1992]: 152 – 54)
This type of ekphrasis might be called “critical.” In this instance it is com-
bined with maieutic ekphrasis, for the omission of this important detail will
reveal an ambiguous aspect of Iris’s character. Ekphrasis may be used to
criticize, recreate, or evaluate an art work. Ekphrastic criticism verges on the
genre of the manifesto since texts featuring this type of ekphrasis often contain
various elements of an art theory, and the task of collecting them and piecing
them together may fall to the reader-as-critic. Cheeke (2008: 183), writing
about prose ekphrasis—that is, the kind of ekphrasis close to “writing on art”
in the wake of Pater—identifies what I propose to call critical ekphrasis. He
aligns this with the kind of “creative criticism” championed in Oscar Wilde’s
The Critic as Artist where the critical act is a “new creation,” “adding more to
the life of the artwork” Cheeke (ibid.: 186) concludes:
Ekphrasis then is an example both of the creative act itself — through the Greek
mimesis, imitating, copying — and of the secondary critical act of commentary,
description, revelation. Indeed [it] is frequently a moment of significant creation
(as Ruskin, Pater on Leonardo, . . . ), and therefore potentially subject itself to
critical commentary and appreciation, and at the same time it is a moment of
criticism, a response to an art object, and thus always open to disagreement or
correction.
This type of ekphrasis should clearly be differentiated from the fictional
type. But we could also venture that when it is used to interpret the visual,
ekphrasis in fiction might sometimes easily rival ekphrasis in art criticism and
art history. The deliberate choice of the connoisseur’s language of art critics
has a long history in Henry James, Emile Zola, Theophile Gautier, Karl
Huysmans, Virginia Woolf, John Banville, Tracy Chevalier, Siri Hustvedt,
and others. Overrunning the boundaries between fiction and nonfiction
and between creation and academic study, these novels urge us to rethink
ekphrastic categories and uses in relation to art theory.
256
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/245/528854/0390245.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 01 October 2025


── PAGE 13 ──
The rivalry between literature, art history, and aesthetics dates back to the
coining of the term by Baumgarten in 1735 and the separation among the
three disciplines. Vasari wrote ekphrases without pretending to be strictly an
art historian (there was no such thing then) or a “novelist” (no such thing
either yet) but a biographer enjoying the freedom of his art. Ruskin on Turner,
or Pater on Leonardo, for instance, wrote about art in a hybrid medium
mixing together reflection, evaluation, philosophy, biography, and fiction.
But “writing for art” means “envoicing” a silent painting, as in “l’e´crit sur
l’art” (Cheeke 2008: 24). Art history, too, largely relies on ekphrasis, even
when there are reproductions, pushing the limits of representation and
exposing its points of fusion or friction with literature. The novelist or the
poet can also borrow from museums or gallery collections, which may be
checked online by the reader/viewer who nowadays is much more cognizant
of museums, galleries, and the art market.
Heuristic Ekphrasis: Linking Text with Knowledge and Discovery
The link between art history and “writing for art” (Cheeke 2008) is a subtle
one. Dealing with art, language, and the ethical and aesthetic issues at stake
in both, its reverberations extend into the current ekphrastic practices that
might be characterized as “a form of critical knowledge” (Kennedy 2012: 85).
This was the case for Stanley Spencer when he made a “discovery” while
painting and then writing about his painting, which revealed to him some-
thing about himself and about his own artistic choices. A particular phrase
of John Donne’s, “to heaven by heaven,” puzzled him, and painting helped
him make sense of it, as he explained in one of his lectures at Oxford in 1922:
I loved the studious atmosphere of the room and I began to read an extract of a
sermon by the metaphysical poet, John Donne. The lines that struck me were: “As
I go to Heaven by Heaven.” I thought he meant literally “by Heaven” as though he
were getting a broad view of it when as, of course, he really meant “As I go to
Heaven by the virtue of Heaven in me.” As soon as I came to the words “by
Heaven,” I seemed to imagine Donne went past heaven, alongside heaven & as I was
thinking like this seemed to see four people praying in four directions: I saw their exact
relative positions within a moment in a second. Heaven was Heaven everywhere so, of
course, they all prayed in all directions. Well when I had done this picture, I found I
had made another discovery. I liked it when the same thing seen in different places in a picture looked
different. . . . I also noticed that the physical sense of the picture coincided with the
spiritual. I mean, for instance, that the furthest figure in the picture was the most
remote in a spiritual sense. These discoveries I made as a direct result of liking
Donne & his poetry. (Spencer 2001: 118, my italics)
The italicized words testify to the visual and spatial quality of Spencer’s
imagination that serves as a kind of preview of the work to come. Spencer
Louvel
† Types of Ekphrasis
257
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/245/528854/0390245.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 01 October 2025


── PAGE 14 ──
insists on the heuristic import of his experience, which yielded a twofold
revelation,onebeforestartingtopaint,oneoncetheworkwasdone.Thisenlight-
ened him about Donne’s meaning as well as his own aesthetic preferences.
In her “illustrated novel” The Sensualist, Barbara Hodgson (2001 [1998])
inserts a great number of anatomical plates as well as pictures of boxes, dried
plants, collages of maps, photographs, dictionary entries, which together
transform her book into a hermeneutic quest, or a kind of detective story.
Above all, the images stage an interrogation of the interplay between identity,
scientific knowledge, and art, reflecting the “anatomical art” in which the
heroine specializes. In particular, the art of an allegedly stolen woodcut by
Vesalius reproduced in the book fascinates her and provides the subject of an
ekphrasis. The book thus becomes an interpretive challenge that compels the
reader to ponder over the complex and varied relations of the visual objects
presented. The assemblage of the book, replete with scientific pictures, is meant
to be a source of knowledge as well as visual enjoyment.
Reading such books, whether they display material pictures or contain
their description, constitutes what Grønstad (2016: 233) calls a “neo-phenom-
enological hermeneutics,” which is an encounter and an experience typical of
“the ekphrastic turn” and of the ekphrastic moment.
The various functions of ekphrasis of course produce different “reading
events” by affecting the reader phenomenologically when he or she “encoun-
ters ekphrasis” (Kennedy 2012). It stands to reason, then, that the phenomena
of reception should deserve our attention and care.
The Ekphrastic Moment
I propose the term “ekphrastic moment” for the moment of some duration
experienced when ekphrasis reaches beyond its own definite textual space. It
differs from the “pregnant moment” or the kairos, which are thought of as
relatively fleeting experiences. Between the more extended time of the whole
narrative and the “ekphrastic moment,” the reader notices a change of reg-
ister, or a “deceleration” of rhythm and speed, hence a change in the relation
between time and space.
Given that the ekphrastic moment is a process and a duration, it is set in
motion by the ekphrastic text passage, from which waves propagate like
concentric circles in water, expanding the effect of ekphrasis beyond its
descriptive paragraphs. The “ekphrastic moment” makes it possible to
inscribe ekphrasis on the time axis and to reveal the ambiguity of this in-
between genre, poised on the limit between two metaphysical implications,
two arts, two (or more) media. It is also a moment of risk, when the two media
are reciprocally testing their limits. Their friction is rich with potential.
258
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/245/528854/0390245.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 01 October 2025


── PAGE 15 ──
The tableau-vivant is a good example of the “ekphrastic moment” for it holds
its spectators in its power. For example in Edith Wharton’s The House of Mirth,
Lily Bart gives a perfect rendering of Reynolds’s portrait of Mrs. Lloyd. Time
is suspended both by the text (the ekphrasis) and in the diegesis as spectators
are left speechless. This arrest by the ekphrasis provokes a kind of textual
oscillation in between action and reaction. A realization is initiated by the text
before and has thrilling aftereffects once the enactors have disappeared. It
stretches time with the anticipation of the event and with its aftereffects, and
includes intra-diegetic(mainlymasculine)gazesforthereader/viewer’s reflec-
tion. This shows how the ekphrastic “reading event” may turn into a signifi-
cant experience for the reader/viewer outside the fictional world.
A Phenomenological Experience: A Reading Event
Reading/viewing the hybrid word/image text works on our senses (see The
Sensualist ), on our percepts, emotions, and bodies. I suggest that word/image
reading/viewing causes an event, an advent, which is close to what Marin
(1999: 15) called a “reading event,” occurring “in the very humble meaning
of what arises from what happens in what one is reading, all of a sudden,
almost unexpectedly.” There is a before and an after of this surprise, as in the
“ekphrastic moment.” When the image “happens to/in” a text, it interrupts
it; it “objects” (Winterson 1995: 19). The body is moved, “seized” by the
image that is incorporated, when some pictures produce strong affects, liber-
ating the forces they captured (cf. Deleuze 1989: 39), which might be one
of the reasons why onscreen texts/images are objects of such fascination.
Somehow the reader’s body is affected by the impression, and the reader,
stimulated and alerted by ekphrasis, is activated: he or she generates super-
impositions, collages, and montages that make up a palimpsestic image. The
word/image text implies a coproduction, an activation on the part of the
reader. Previously “contained” between covers, the book all of a sudden
comes to life thanks to the workings of an aesthetics of surprise that disrupts
the reading process and provokes its “re-dysposition,” as Didi-Huberman
terms recontextualization, substituting “dys-” for the “dis-” of “disposition”
(Didi-Huberman 2009: 75). The “syncopation of the visual” suspends disbe-
lief and the sensory echoes pull the individual toward the singular, toward the
vibrations of what I have called “iconorhythm” (Louvel 2002: 242), a blending
of word and image, and of time and space. The image plays the role of a
mediator, a means of reaching unheard-of or unspoken truths, a link between
memory and imagination.
These processes involving mental images and emotions are best con-
fronted with the aid of the cognitive sciences at the crossroads with neurology
Louvel
† Types of Ekphrasis
259
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/245/528854/0390245.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 01 October 2025


── PAGE 16 ──
and psychoanalysis. This might open a new horizon for polymedial research,
“une ide´e de recherche” as Barthes (1980: 35) wittily offered when writing
about Proust.
Reception: The Pictorial Third
Finally, the study of the relationships between word and image, their “com-
merce,” is of great import and holds a privileged place as it displays the way
language and image work in our quickly evolving world in the context of
enormous technological changes. Ekphrasis stands at the core of the process,
and we have to acknowledge the phenomological import of its various ava-
tars, so often ignored. The reading experience as the consequence of the
translation into words of a visual component, whether brief or more devel-
oped, while fulfilling one or more of the great variety of functions I have tried
to describe, takes place on the side of reception; it is part of the human
experience. Information technology has exerted a great influence on mind
and body, speeding connection and expanding linkages. Word and image are
inextricably tied together, as in the sculpture of Laocoo¨n.
If Lessing’s Laocoo¨n allegorically presents the inextricability of the interar-
tistic relationships in the multiple knots of the snake coiled around Laocoo¨n’s
body, it is far too violent an image for our contemporary practices when
intermediality is the rule and at everyone’s fingertips. My own conception is
less aggressive, and less hierarchical too, for I do not see the relation of word
and image in terms of a vertical structure but in the mode of the rhizome,
refusing the gendered separation between feminine image and male text. To
my mind, no mortal struggle is involved, but rather a fruitful collaboration
and a productive encounter, which is realized in what I call the “pictorial
third.” The pictorial third emerges thanks to transpositions in which text and
image are intertwined. Images are always already-there, circulating in our
world, and language constantly transposes them. Conversely, the iconotext
shows that image depends on text (Louvel 2011: 22).
The detour of the text via the image may be necessary as a way of provid-
ing meaning. Conversely, the image must be elevated by language to reach
significance beyond effect and experience. The contemporary arts of per-
formance and installation, and digital art as aesthetic “events” achieve a
synesthesia, coupling eye with ear. The “pictorial third” is my term for this
synesthesia, this in-between movement when the ekphrastic text reaches out
to the image, when the image happens to the text, and when in the reader’s
mind and body something of the iconotext resonates. In between text, image,
and reading something arises still veiled and hazy; it also involves rhythm
when the “pictorial third” conjures a visual syncopation.
260
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/245/528854/0390245.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 01 October 2025


── PAGE 17 ──
The “pictorial third” is a “relation,” a dynamic activity, that of a picturing
reading, a read picture conveyed by ekphrasis first and foremost, very much
in keeping with our Zeitgeist. The pictorial/visual impetus triggers the “pic-
torial third” that finds its locus in the iconotext, in between text and image,
when it arises in the reader’s mind on her/his inner screen. The “pictorial
third” is dynamic, a movement or drive that produces a surplus of meaning
and affect, a fantasy hovering in between the two media. It is a modality
sharing qualities with the living, a lived experience, an “event” in the mean-
ing of what happens: an intermedial performance.
Bibliography
Banville, John
1993 Ghosts (London: Secker and Warburg).
Barnes, Julian
1989 A History of the World in 10 and 1/2 Chapters (London: Jonathan Cape).
Barthes, Roland
1980 La chambre claire, Note sur la photographie (Paris: Gallimard).
Benjamin, Walter
1969 [1936 ] “The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction.” In Illuminations,
translated by Harry Zohn, edited by Hannah Arendt, 217 – 51 (New York: Schocken).
Bryson, Norman
1986 Vision and Painting: The Logic of the Gaze (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press).
Cheeke, Stephen
2008 Writing for Art, The Aesthetic of Ekphrasis (Manchester: Manchester University Press).
Cometa, Michele
2012 La scrittura delle immagini (Milano: Cortina).
Danielewski, Mark Z.
2000 House of Leaves, 2nd ed. (New York: Pantheon Books).
Deleuze, Gilles
1989 Francis Bacon: Logique de la sensation (Paris: Seuil).
Deleuze, Gilles, and Fe´lix Guattari
1993 A Thousand Plateaus (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press).
Didi-Huberman, Georges
2009 Quand les images prennent position (Paris: Minuit).
Durcan, Paul
1991 Crazy about Women (Dublin: The National Gallery of Ireland).
Faber, Michel
2011 The Crimson Petal and the White (Edinburgh: Canongate).
Findley, Timothy
2001 The Wars (London: Faber and Faber).
Foucault, Michel
1966 Les mots et les choses (Paris: Gallimard).
Grønstad, Absjorn
2016 “Transaesthetic Temporalities. Ekphrasis and the Poetics of Deceleration.” In Literature
in Contemporary Media Culture, edited by Sarah J. Paulson and Anders Skare Malvik, 222 – 36
(Amsterdam: John Benjamins).
Hamilton, Ann
2005 “Phora,” www.lamaisonrouge.org/PDF/Press Release Ann Hamilton.pdf.
Louvel
† Types of Ekphrasis
261
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/245/528854/0390245.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 01 October 2025


── PAGE 18 ──
Heffernan, James A. W.
1993 A Museum of Words: The Poetics of Ekphrasis from Homer to Ashbery (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press).
Hemon, Aleksandar
2008 The Lazarus Project (New York: Riverhead Books).
Hodgson, Barbara
2001 [1998] The Sensualist (San Francisco: Chronicle).
Hollander, John
1988 “The Poetics of Ekphrasis,” Word & Image 4: 209 – 19.
Hustvedt, Siri
2002 What I Loved (New York: Scepter Hodder and Stoughton).
2003 [1992] The Blindfold (New York: Macmillan Picador).
2014 The Blazing World (New York: Simon and Schuster).
2015 Mysteries of the Rectangle: Essays on Painting (New York: Princeton Architectural Press).
James, Henry
2009 [1903] The Ambassadors (Oxford: Oxford World’s Classics).
Josipovici, Gabriel
2002 Goldberg Variations (Manchester: Carcanet).
Kennedy, David
2012 The Ekphrastic Encounter (Farnham: Ashgate).
Krieger, Murray
1992 Ekphrasis: The Illusion of the Natural Sign (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press).
Louvel, Liliane
2002 Texte/image, images a` lire textes a` voir (Rennes: Presses Universitaires de Rennes).
2010 Le tiers pictural (Rennes: Presses Universitaires de Rennes).
2011 Poetics of the Iconotext (Farnham: Ashgate).
Marin, Louis
1999 L’e´criture de soi (Paris: P.U.F./Colle`ge international de philosophie).
McLuhan, Marshall
1964 Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man (New York: McGraw Hill).
Mitchell, W. J. T.
1994 [1964] Picture Theory (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Paulson, Sarah J.
2016 “Showing Seeing Across Media, The Contemporary Novel as Visual Event.” In Lit-
erature in Contemporary Media Culture, edited by Sarah J. Paulson and Anders Skare Malvik,
237 – 59 (Amsterdam: John Benjamins).
Rousset, Jean
1990 passages e´changes et transpositions (Paris: Jose´ Corti).
Safran Foer, Jonathan
2005 Extremely Loud and Incredibly Close (London: Hamish Hamilton/Penguin).
Sager Eidt, Laura M.
2008 Writing and Filming the Painting. Ekphrasis in Literature and Film (Amsterdam: Rodopi).
Self, Will
2002 Dorian. An Imitation (London: Viking).
Sontag, Susan
1977 On Photography (London: Penguin).
Spencer, Stanley
2001 The Writings of Stanley Spencer, edited by Adrian Glew (London: Tate Gallery).
Webb, Ruth
2009 Ekphrasis, Imagination, and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice (Farnham:
Ashgate).
Wharton, Edith
1905 The House of Mirth (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons).
262
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/245/528854/0390245.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 01 October 2025


── PAGE 19 ──
Winterson, Jeanette
1995 Art Objects: Essays on Ecstasy and Effrontery (London: Jonathan Cape).
Yacobi, Tamar
1999 “The Ekphrastic Figure of Speech.” In Text and Visuality, edited by Martin Heusser,
Miche`le Hannoosh, Leo Hoek, Charlotte Schoell-Glass, and David Scott, 93 – 101
(Amsterdam: Rodopi).
2005 “Ekphrastic Double Exposure: Blake Morrison, Francis Bacon, Robert Browning, and
Fra Pandolfo as Four-in-One.” In On Verbal/Visual Representation, edited by Martin Heus-
ser, Miche`le Hannoosh, Eric Haskell, Leo Hoek, David Scott, and Peter de Voogd,
219 – 30 (Amsterdam: Rodopi).
Louvel
† Types of Ekphrasis
263
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/245/528854/0390245.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 01 October 2025
