# The Cultural Work of Ekphrasis in Contemporary Anglophone Transcultural Novels
# Source: Rippl - 2018 - The Cultural Work of Ekphrasis in Contemporary Anglophone Transcultural Novels.pdf
# BibTeX key: rippl_cultural_2018
# Zotero dir: 3116
# Extracted chars: 64534
# Format: PDF
============================================================

── PAGE 1 ──
The Cultural Work of Ekphrasis in Contemporary
Anglophone Transcultural Novels
Gabriele Rippl
University of Bern
Abstract
This article takes as its starting point the conspicuous ekphrastic nature of
many contemporary Anglophone transcultural novels and asks about their engage-
ment with ekphrasis as a self-reflexive writing mode delving into implicit power rela-
tions, cultural hierarchies, and the media landscapes of our digital age. Against the
backdrop of intermediality theory, my functional analysis of the cultural work of
ekphrasis builds its argument on the analysis of three novels: NoViolet Bulawayo’s
We Need New Names (2014), Taiye Selasi’s Ghana Must Go (2013), and Teju Cole’s Open City
(2011). I analyze these writers’ interventions in the field of aesthetics, considering net-
works of aesthetic exchange as well as identity politics, and argue that the functions
of ekphrasis in narratives written by the transcultural writers discussed here are of a
cultural-critical and sociopolitical nature.
Keywords
contemporary Anglophone novel, transcultural writers, cultural functions
of ekphrasis, media landscapes
1. Ekphrasis Today
If one considers today’s literary market, it is immediately apparent how
important and topical ekphrasis as a writing practice is. Novels such as
John Updike’s Seek My Face (2002), Raj Kamal Jha’s Fireproof (2007), Salman
Poetics Today 39:2 ( June 2018)
DOI 10.1215/03335372-4324444
q 2018 by Porter Institute for Poetics and Semiotics
Earlier versions of some parts of this essay were presented at a Berlin workshop on ekphrasis in
August 2015 and at Birgit Neumann’s research colloquium at the University of Duesseldorf
in January 2016. I thank the audiences for their comments and several readers, particularly
Birgit Neumann and Renate Brosch.
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/265/528860/0390265.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 2 ──
Rushdie’s The Enchantress of Florence (2008), Siri Hustvedt’s What I Loved (2003)
and The Blazing World (2014), as well as Donna Tartt’s The Goldfinch (2013) are
prime examples of the wide use of this ancient mode of writing. It is precisely
this broad presence and sheer number of ekphrases in contemporary Anglo-
phone literature that invites scholars to investigate existing word-image
configurations, literature’s collaboration, interaction, and competition with
images as well as today’s media landscapes and media ecologies in general
(Tabbi and Wutz 1997). Clearly, contemporary writers know that they write
for an audience used to multimedia environments, enabling new forms of
immediacy, interactivity, and text-picture-soundinteractions. American nov-
elists such as Teju Cole, Jennifer Egan, Dave Eggers, and Jonathan Franzen
are “acutely aware of [their] responsibility to write books that are compelling
enough to compete with the new media that have taken over the world”
(Aspden 2010, quoting Franzen). Today’s readers are accustomed to retriev-
ing information distributed on split TV screens, on the Internet, and from
printed material such as newspapers and magazines, which themselves
increasingly combine words with images. This is one reason why contempo-
rary novels and poetry collections often include pictures, maps, diagrams,
and other visual depictions and employ ekphrastic devices.1 Another reason
for the fascination with word-picture combinations and ekphrasis that writers
and scholars exhibit lies in the tendency of these modes of writing to help
reconstruct, question, and subvert concepts of representation. While the
highly self-reflexive quality of contemporary ekphrastic texts demonstrates
on the one hand the inadequacy of verbally representing visual data and
acknowledges that each verbal representation is necessarily also a “misrep-
resentation” (Klarer 1999: 1–4),2 the sheer number of ekphrastic descriptions
in post- and post-postmodernist literary texts, on the other hand, seems to
insist on the fact that the verbal medium cannot be foregone in our digital
age. In contemporary literary texts ekphrasis comes in many shapes and takes
on a range of important cultural functions, but all instances of ekphrastic
writing in the primary sources discussed in this article are “pictureless” ones.
They share this feature with ancient ekphrases. While for ancient rhetoricians
the term ekphrasis referred to any description that was enargetic, in modern
debates the concept has undergone a severe narrowing of meaning and refers
only to descriptions of works of art (Webb 2009). While enargetic descriptions
1. For a general discussion of the increase of novels where text is juxtaposed with images, see
Wolfgang Hallet (2009, 2014, 2015). Regarding ekphrastic endeavors of the last decades, Emma
Kafalenos (2012) has noticed an increase of image-ekphrasis combinations in literary texts that
replaces the relationship of substitution between image and ekphrasis. She discusses the impli-
cations of reading ekphrasis alongside images.
2. See below for a critical discussion of the term representation in the context of ekphrasis research.
266
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/265/528860/0390265.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 3 ──
(that is, detailed, lively and often extended ones) are still an important feature
of some contemporary literature, often the reader also encounters relatively
short, stenographic ekphrases that are mere references and nonrepresentational
traces instead of fully fledged descriptions of images. This new quality of
ekphrasis is neither in line with its ancient conceptualization nor with more
recent definitions such as James A. W. Heffernan’s (1993: 3) widely accepted
and enormously influential definition of ekphrasis as a second-degree rep-
resentation—“the verbal representation of visual representation” (visual representation
meaning a work of art). In order to adequately describe the manifold word-
image configurations in contemporary literature and the visual arts, as well as
the new media, the concept of ekphrasis needs to be adapted, modified, and
expanded:
.
First, with respect to the visual objects described ekphrastically: accord-
ing to many researchers these objects are no longer exclusively works
of art.
.
Second, with regard to current definitions of representation (see Heffer-
nan’s use of the term). It has been suggested that representation be
replaced with terms such as “intermedial quotation or re-presentation (rep-
resentation in the second degree)” (Yacobi 2013: 1), re-representation
(Kafalenos 2012: 27), or evocation (Rippl 2005: 97).
.
Third, with respect to theoretical conceptualizations of ekphrasis with-
in the semiotic paradigm. In accordance with Rajewsky’s (2002, 2005,
2010) and Wolf’s (2005) respective definitions, I consider ekphrasis
to be an intermedial reference and consequently discuss contemporary
ekphrasis within the wider cultural frame of intermediality, that is,
beyond the semiotic paradigm (Rippl 2005, 2010, 2015a, 2015b).
.
Fourth, with regard to the media of ekphrasis. According to some critics
(e.g., Bruhn 2000), language is no longer considered the only medium
to deliver ekphrases; opera, drama, film, and so on, may also do so.
While the first three expansions of ekphrasis are relevant for our dis-
cussion, the fourth expansion does not apply to the transcultural nar-
ratives discussed here. In this article, I consider as ekphrasis any explicit
or covert verbal/literary reference to images, including descriptive-
static ekphrases and those charged with narrative impulses, whether
concise and abbreviated (e.g., Tamar Yacobi’s [1995] examples of
“ekphrastic models”) or extended and detailed (Yacobi 1995, 1997).3
3. Two important categories of ekphrastic writing today, ekphrasis “born digital” and critical
ekphrases (that is, ekphrastic writing produced by literary critics and art historians) will not be
addressed here. For a discussion of these categories see Behluli and Rippl (2017); see Hayles
(2008: 3) for the notion of “digital born,” which refers to “a first-generation digital object
created on a computer and (usually) meant to be read on a computer.”
Rippl
† The Cultural Work of Ekphrasis
267
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/265/528860/0390265.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 4 ──
2. Cultural-Critical Functions of Contemporary Ekphrasis
As an intersection of signification systems and a highly self-reflexive mode of
writing that triggers meta-representational questions, ekphrasis is able “to
disclose the values, belief systems, and assumptions underlying our concepts
of the verbal and the visual” (Brosch, “Introduction” to the present issue
240). While ekphrasis may consolidate prevailing epistemological and ideo-
logical structures, its cultural-critical functions are pivotal in Anglophone
transcultural fiction,4 which is inherently interested in negotiating prevalent
epistemologies, ideologies, notions of identity and nation, as well as questions
relating to post- and neocolonialism. The experimental, intermedial liter-
ary aesthetic of transcultural novels, which serves sociopolitical and ethical
goals, has so far been underresearched. Teju Cole’s, Taiye Selasi’s, and
NoViolet Bulawayo’s novels, for instance, attest to the many different ways
in which young writers today imaginatively engage in sociopolitical issues
that they translate into cultural-critical aesthetics and innovative formal
modes. While living now, at least part-time, in the United States, the three
writers share roots in postcolonial sub-Saharan African countries and are
familiar with experiences of diaspora and transcultural, deterritorialized
identity. Unsurprisingly, their novels tell stories of transnational identities
and lives with multiple topographic settings and locations, thus attesting to
the extensive migratory movements that characterize our age. Their self-
reflexive ekphrastic quality reflects a broad aesthetic as well as sociopolitical
and cultural-critical interest in border crossings, translation, and hybridity. In
her discussion of the pictorial saturation of literary texts, Liliane Louvel (2011
[1998]: 89–100) has underlined the importance of questions concerning the
functions of ekphrasis. As is the case with all cultural phenomena, these are
subject to historical change and vary among different times, places, and (sub-)
cultures. Louvel’s list of functions (ibid.: 101–33) includes textual functions
of ekphrasis such as the construction of reference, generating narratives,
revelation, and authentification (especially in the case of photography), but
also ideological and ethical functions (for the latter see also Kennedy 2012;
Loizeaux 2008; Rippl 2015b). There are additional functions such as affec-
tive ones, “aura-enhancing/auraticizing” ones (Behluli and Rippl 2017),
cognitive ones (Brosch 2015; Yacobi 1997),5 and—as I claim—cultural-
critical and sociopolitical ones that play a crucial role in transcultural litera-
4. In this article “Anglophone transcultural novels” is the denomination for novels written in
English by authors with a transcultural background and/or protagonists and settings with the
same feature.
5. “All ekphrasis deautomatizes our perception by defamiliarizing the manner and the matter
of the source in re-presentation. The making-strange results from the very transfer of a visual
image to another medium, with its radically different sign-system and structural principles, and
268
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/265/528860/0390265.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 5 ──
ture, tackling questions of cultural memory (including the Western canon),
trauma, and social imaginaries in general (Do¨ring 2002; Emery 2007; Neu-
mann 2015, 2016; Rippl 2015b). In the long academic debate over ekphrasis,
only a few scholars have investigated functions of ekphrasis in any depth.
W. J. T. Mitchell, and more recently Elizabeth Bergman Loizeaux, have for
instance discussed to what extent ekphrastic strategies are saturated with
implicit power relations and cultural hierarchies. Both scholars claim that
one function of ekphrasis as a social practice is that it translates between self
and other, that it “transfers into the realm of literary art sublimated versions
of our ambivalence about social others” (Mitchell 1992: 702) and engages in
“otherness” and “the foreign” (Loizeaux 2008: 9–11). According to Loizeaux
(2008: 8, 10), “looking is not, never has been, ethically neutral, and ekphrasis
stages relations lived under that fact. . . . The inherently social dynamics of
ekphrasis and its possibilities for polyvocality made it especially attractive to
a postmodernism alive to the multiplicity of the lyric subject and to racial,
ethnic, and gender differences.” Thus, cultural-critical functions are intrin-
sically linked to ekphrasis because ekphrasis as a mode of writing reflects on
questions of (re-)representation and showcases epistemological frameworks
and cultural hierarchies—crucial insights for any discussion of ekphrasis in
transcultural contexts (Rippl 2015b).
3. Cultural-Critical Functions in Bulawayo, Selasi, and Cole
It is against the backdrop of recent developments in intermediality studies
and ekphrasis theory (Heffernan 2015; Kennedy 2012, 2015; Rippl 2015a,
2015b) that NoViolet Bulawayo’s We Need New Names (2014), Taiye Selasi’s
Ghana Must Go (2013), and Teju Cole’s Open City (2011) are analyzed.6 The
authors share not only family roots in African countries such as Ghana,
Nigeria, and Zimbabwe, but also an interest in an intermedial aesthetic,
most prominently in ekphrasis. This helps them discuss, first, sub-Saharan
African politics and civil wars (for instance the Nigerian Civil War also known
as the Biafran War; the Zimbabwean War of Liberation); second, the role of
Western mass media such as American television and its stereotypical rep-
resentation of Africa: and third, African transnational mobility, the new
global African immigrants and complex African diaspora identities that
include all social strata, lower-, middle-, and upper-class, whose experiences
communicative priorities. The more established that image in the source artwork or model, the
ruder the shock of its reworking” (Yacobi 1997: 41).
6. For a detailed discussion of Bulawayo’s and Cole’s uses of ekphrasis in their novels see
Neumann and Rippl (2018). See also Behluli and Rippl (2017).
Rippl
† The Cultural Work of Ekphrasis
269
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/265/528860/0390265.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 6 ──
are not reducible to the “black Atlantic” paradigm of slavery. Reviewers and
critics alike have shown a huge interest in these writers, often discussing them
and their protagonists as “Afropolitans.” According to Selasi’s widely read
(and critically discussed) essay “Bye-Bye Babar” (2005),7 “Afropolitan” and
“Afropolitanism” refer to a new generation of cosmopolitan African immi-
grants who are cultural hybrids, multilingual, have mixed ethnic roots, come
from middle- or upper-class backgrounds, have good academic educations
and successful careers, and enjoy being “Africans of the world,” but “must
form an identity along at least three dimensions: national, racial, cultural—
with subtle tensions in between” (Selasi 2005). While ekphrasis has tradition-
ally been discussed within the paradigm of the paragone, and hence as a power
struggle between word and image, Bulawayo’s, Selasi’s, and Cole’s novels
employ ekphrasis as an important means of fathoming word-image intersec-
tions beyond the paragone and as a way of negotiating the impact of the
Western canon of works of art and literature as well as that of today’s mass
media and global networks of communication (television, the Internet, social
media, movies, etc.). The ekphrases produced by their protagonists—all of
them African immigrants to the United States or children of African immi-
grants—negotiate on the one hand personal problems concerning cultural
assimilation, the trauma of immigration and other personal traumas (for
instance sexual abuse), and on the other hand crimes against humanity
and violent conflicts of a political and historical nature (the Holocaust, colo-
nial clashes, slavery, etc.). As will become clear in what follows, the ekphrases
presented in the novels demonstrate that ekphrasis does, indeed, come in
many shapes and has expanded with respect to the objects described: they are
no longer restricted to the field of Western high art, but now also cover
noncanonical, non-Western artistic objects, African artifacts, postcards,
TV stills, and pictures/scenes from American pornographic films as well as
other images circulated by the mass media of our time.
3.1. “Transculturing” Ekphrasis: NoViolet Bulawayo’s We Need New Names
(2014) and Taiye Selasi’s Ghana Must Go (2013)
Born in Zimbabwe, NoViolet Bulawayo received her university education at
Cornell University (MFA), before she went on to become a Stegner Fellow
at Stanford University, teaching fiction and creative writing. In her prize-
winning first novel We Need New Names she discusses how important it is for
Africans to give themselves new names, as Bulawayo’s female protagonist,
Darling, and her friends do when they reimagine their shanty town as
7. See Wasihun (2016) for a discussion of Selasi’s concept and the critique it has provoked.
270
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/265/528860/0390265.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 7 ──
“Paradise” and an affluent neighborhood as “Budapest.”8 The novelist aims
at delivering “new narratives beyond preconceived Western discourses,”
“new narratives of Africans in trans-lation,” in modern diasporic living con-
ditions (Wasihun 2016: 397). We Need New Names is a coming-of-age-novel
narrated in the captivating voice of its ten-year-old protagonist. The novel is
comprised of two parts, the first of which deals with Darling’s childhood in a
shantytown located in an unnamed African country resembling Zimbabwe.
Bulawayo’s representation of dire African life focuses on everyday political
and sexual violence, poverty, and illnesses such as AIDS, but is interspersed
with the children’s laughter, thus allowing for comic relief. The novel’s
second part presents Darling’s harrowing life after migrating to the United
States where she comes to live with her aunt in “Destroyedmichygen” (Bula-
wayo 2014: 147) as she calls the economically rundown Detroit, Michigan.
While Selasi’s male and female middle-class protagonists are overachievers,
Bulawayo’s protagonist Darling comes from a poor background, which is
why her childhood in Africa as well as the circumstances of her immigration
to the United States are far less comfortable than those of Selasi’s protag-
onists. As a teenager, Darling struggles with cultural assimilation and only
gradually adjusts to an American way of life, coming to enjoy American food,
popular culture, and music, and to accept its standards of beauty, only to find
out later as a young woman that America will never feel like a real home.
Ekphrasis is a prominent writing mode in the novel, allowing Bulawayo to
enact the tensions between African and American experiences and to nego-
tiate contradictory feelings of belonging and nonbelonging, identity, and
otherness. Clearly, Bulawayo’s visual strategies are responsible for the intense
impressions readers take away from this novel. We Need New Names is replete
with Darling’s colorful descriptions of her surroundings, of people and
objects. Her description of some pastry may serve as an example:
I look closely at her long hand, at the thing she is eating. It’s flat and the outer part is
crusty. The top is creamish and looks fluffy and soft, and there are coin-like things
8. In Bulawayo’s novel, Darling and the other children use their imaginations to forget about
their hunger and dream of a better life in a “real” country such as the United States. They speak
a little English and know their global geography, as becomes clear in chapter 3, “Country-
Game,” which allows the children “to be certain countries” (Bulawayo 2014: 49). Of course
“everybody wants to be the U.S.A. and Great Britain and Canada and Australia and Swit-
zerland and France and Italy and Sweden and Germany and Russia and Greece and them.
These are the country-countries. If you lose the fight, then you just have to settle for countries
like Dubai and South Africa and Botswana and Tanzania and them. They are not country-
countries, but at least life is better than here. Nobody wants to be rags of countries like Congo,
like Somalia, like Iraq, like Sudan, like Haiti, like Sri Lanka, and not even this one we live in —
who wants to be a terrible place of hunger and things falling apart?” (ibid.).
Rippl
† The Cultural Work of Ekphrasis
271
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/265/528860/0390265.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 8 ──
on it, a deep pink, the color of burn wounds. I also see sprinkles of red and green
and yellow, and finally the brown bumps that look like pimples. (Bulawayo 2014: 6)
Living in poverty, Darling is of course always hungry and would love to have
a bite herself, hence the focus on a piece of pastry. But what is striking in this
description is Darling’s choice of comparisons: in addition to the “brown
bumps” reminding her of “pimples,” the “deep pink” has “the color of burn
wounds,” which recalls Darling’s shantytown existence and her exposure to
the recurrent violence of a politically unstable postcolonial African country.
Bulawayo makes clear that the country’s colonial past is one reason for its
present political chaos, about which the reader learns through Darling’s
reports and ekphrases.
In addition to Darling’s critical discussion of the role of Western mass
media and her colorful descriptions of people and objects, the novel engages
primarily with photography as a medium of documentation of family history.
Darling’s ekphrasis of her father’s photograph, taken at a university gradu-
ation ceremony (ibid.: 22) informs the reader that her father left the family to
work in South Africa, neither keeping in contact nor supporting his family
financially. Darling also produces an ekphrasis of a photograph of her “cous-
in Makhosi carrying me when I were little” (ibid.: 23), which again provides
the reader with insight into her family history and the bleak fate of male
family members such as Makhosi who ruined their health in the diamond
mines. Hidden under the bed is a photograph of her grandfather who was
killed “during the war for feeding and hiding the terrorists who were trying to
get our country back” from the white minority (ibid.: 20). “During the war”
refers to the “Zimbabwean War of Liberation,” which in Western historiog-
raphy is often derogatively called the “Rhodesian Bush War,” raging from
1964 to 1979, but with origins going back to the colonization of the region by
white “settlers” (that is, colonizers). During this Zimbabwean War of Liber-
ation a conservative white minority fought black nationalist forces in order to
keep their power and prevent the implementation of majority rule and uni-
versal suffrage in “Southern Rhodesia” (as the British colony was formerly
called). Darling’s ekphrasis of a photograph of her grandfather takes the
reader deep into the family’s past to a more traditional and rural Africa
when the soil was still fertile but political violence was on the rise:
In the hidden picture, Grandfather is speaking, his mouth pursed. There are frown
lines on his forehead, and from the way his red eyes are looking deeply at the
camera, you would think that he wants to eat it. He has a bone going through his
nose and is wearing earrings. Behind him are fields of waist-high maize crops, just
endless and endless green. (ibid.: 24)
272
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/265/528860/0390265.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 9 ──
The ekphrasis of this photograph gives voice to a colonial conflict that cost
Darling’s grandfather his life. Six chapters later, in chapter 8 (“Blak Power”
[sic ]), Darling finds the counterpart to this photograph in a white couple’s
home, without however realizing that the two photographs show the same
scene from different angles, the moment before her grandfather was shot by
the white men:
A man stands next to a long rock, pointing a gun. He bites his lower lip in con-
centration, like maybe he is constipated and he is trying to push it out. Another
man is dressed in a soldier’s uniform and carries a red beret. His left breast is flashy
with metal thingies. He looks at the camera like he doesn’t know where to look. A
man dressed in khaki stands in front of a field of maize. (ibid.: 124)
These ekphrases of photographs conjure up the colonial past of Darling’s
unnamed African country. By presenting ekphrases of the two pictures, Bula-
wayo comments on the fact that in Darling’s shack, the photograph of the
identical scene is hidden under the bed, while the white couple exhibits the
tense colonial scene proudly on their sitting room wall (in proximity to an
African mask). With her ekphrases of the two photographs of the same scene
Bulawayo is able to show both sides of the conflict, thus laying bare colonial
scopic regimes and telling the story of repressed and marginalized African
historical events, of lives sacrificed to colonial interests and human greed,
which are now only conserved in photographs hidden under a mattress in
a shack. Bulawayo’s technique of presenting two ekphrases of photographs
taken at the same scene of a lethal colonial conflict is an intricate way of
“writing back to/gazing back at” the colonizers. But it takes an attentive
reader to appreciate this effect: after all, the two ekphrases are one hundred
pages apart. It is in this sense that the novel is highly self-reflexive, even
developing something like an ethics of seeing.
Darling also produces an ekphrasis of a large traditional mask she encoun-
ters in the white couple’s home after the couple has been abducted by a gang
of young African political activists:
In the sitting room, we stand before the large mask on the wall and stare at the
black face, the eyes gouged out. It is a long, thin face, white lining the eyebrows and
the lips. The forehead is high and protrudes a little, and yellow dots divide it in half.
The nose is long, and the round mouth is open, like it’s letting out a howl. And
finally a horn grows at the top of the head. (ibid.: 123)
This African mask, which adorns the walls of the affluent white couple’s
home, is described in detail, and the dots depicted on the mask return in
the ornaments of the novel’s chapter headings, which are sometimes embroi-
Rippl
† The Cultural Work of Ekphrasis
273
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/265/528860/0390265.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 10 ──
dered with American stars, and sometimes with dots to be found on Ndebele
and other African masks. Today ancient African masks are no longer to be
found in sub-Saharan Africa—the priceless pieces are now exhibited in the
ethnographic sections of European and North American museums or owned
by rich Westerners. Originating as cult objects in ritual performances that
help to summon the spirits of ancestors (Adepegba 1995; Mack 2013 [1994]:
32–55), they lose this function through the process of becoming transcultural
objects in the West. Since ekphrases of African masks (unlike ancient Greek
and Roman artifacts) do not belong to the (Western) canon of ekphrastic
writing, one important cultural-critical function of Bulawayo’s “African”
ekphrases is to help “transculturate” ekphrasis. In this way, the text aims at
opening up the ekphrastic canon and disclosing the hidden agendas of aes-
thetic values (Rippl and Winko 2013). Bulawayo’s aesthetic program can be
defined as “repair work,” not unlike what the French-Algerian artist Kader
Attia pursues in his installation “Repair. 5 Acts” (at Kunst-Werke Berlin,
2013; Attia 2014), which deals with the ghosts and aftereffects of colonialism.
In the chapters set in the United States, Darling produces more ekphrases,
now focusing on products of the digital mass media.9 The central, most
detailed and extended “American” ekphrases Darling produces are “porno-
graphic ekphrases,” describing scenes from pornographic films she watches
on American television (Bulawayo 2014: 200–2, 211, 212–14), some of which
hark back to scenes of violence in Africa. Apart from these long pornographic
ekphrases, the only other extended ekphrasis is one of an African “batik the
size of a beach towel” (ibid.: 282), which Darling finds in a storage box in the
basement of Aunt Fostalina’s house:
It’s a painting of a market scene and it’s crazy with life and color, people selling
things — fruits, vegetables, foodstuffs, colorful beads and cloth, handbags, belts,
animal carvings, just anything you can think of. There’s children, women, men,
women with babies on their backs, old people, a couple of dogs, a bicycle, every-
body and everything alive under a bright blue sky.
Looking at the cloth I’m remembering how beautiful it felt to be in a real scene
like that, everybody just there together, mingling together, living together, before
things fell apart. I begin to feel this ache in my heart that always comes when I think
of home these days. (ibid.: 283)
9. Darling’s host in Detroit, Aunt Fostalina, is a TV sports program addict, while Darling and
her cousin TK are caught up in the world of the digital media and engrossed with their Mac
computers, DVDs, Netflix, text messages on BlackBerries (Bulawayo 2014: 275, 277, 279), and
iPods (ibid.: 163), social media such as Facebook, Internet platforms like Google and com-
munication via e-mail (ibid.: 223) and Skype.
274
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/265/528860/0390265.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 11 ──
The depicted market scene “crazy with life and color . . . under a bright blue
sky” makes Darling remember life at home “before things fell apart,”10 filling
her with nostalgia for the former peaceful life in an intact community and an
“imaginary homeland” (Rushdie 1991).
Darling also finds a “weird mask” (Bulawayo 2014: 283):
It’s split in the center, one half white, the other black. The black half is split further
in numerous crazy patterns that I can’t figure out, but it looks interesting to me so
I take it and the other stuff upstairs to my room.
. . . the mask is looking at me with the puzzling face; it’s like it’s trying to tell me
something that will take years for me to understand. . . . And finally, on the other
side of the dresser, the batik market is mad busy. I imagine I can hear all sorts of
things — vendors singing their wares, some calling out to me to buy things at
reduced prices; boys whistling sweet tunes to girls; babies crying out for sweets;
the voices of children singing Who discovered the way to India? and playing Andy-
over; the mothers’ laughter rising above everything else. (ibid.: 283 – 84)
While Darling is unable to decipher the meaning and message of the “numer-
ous crazy patterns” of the African mask—possibly the result of growing up in
a postcolonial country where people have lost the knowledge of their own
indigenous culture and art—the African market scene depicted on batik cloth
speaks to her. Ekphrases of African batik art are rare in Anglophone litera-
ture, and it is worth noticing that Bulawayo uses enargeia, a characteristic of
ancient Western ekphrasis, in order to describe the market with an intensity
of effect (“crazy with life,” “crazy patterns,” “the batik market is mad busy,”
“I can hear all sorts of things”), adding sound to visual details so that the scene
almost comes to life. By translating ekphrasis—after all a device deeply
steeped in Western literary history and its canon—into African constella-
tions, We Need New Names does important cultural-critical work, renegotiat-
ing cultural hierarchies by showcasing local African artistic practices and
art forms while at the same time exposing and thwarting Western claims
of artistic superiority and authority over canon formation (see Rippl and
Winko 2013).
Taiye Selasi, writer and photographer of Nigerian and Ghanaian origin,
was born in London and raised in Massachusetts. She is another leading voice
among the young Anglophone novelists and essayists today. Her debut novel
Ghana Must Go (2013) was praised for its narrative technique, its intricate
depiction of racism and the power of love, its transcultural imagination,
10. As Wasihun (2016: 396) has rightly remarked, “the every day struggles for survival and the
constant sense of ‘things falling apart’” refer to Chinua Achebe’s canonical novel Things Fall
Apart (2001 [1958]), which works “like a leitmotif in Bulawayo’s novel.”
Rippl
† The Cultural Work of Ekphrasis
275
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/265/528860/0390265.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 12 ──
and presentation of immigrant characters with hybrid US-African (Gha-
naian and Nigerian) identities. The novel tells the story of one family:
Kweku Sai and his wife Fola Savage as well as their four talented children,
Olu (an excellent medical doctor, “a picture of perfection, New Immigrant
Perfection,” [Selasi 2013: 127]), the twins Taiwo and Kehinde, and Sadie, the
youngest daughter. Apart from bulimic Sadie, who yet has to find her role
in life, the children are all “overachiever[s]” (ibid.: 136), that is, well-educated
Afropolitans. When renowned surgeon Kweku Sai is wrongly accused of the
death of a patient, he just walks away from his life, leaving his wife, a single
mother of four. This traumatic event becomes the hub of the plot and haunts
his deserted wife and children until Kweku’s death of a heart attack sixteen
years later. Only upon his funeral do the family members manage to leave
behind their pain, their suicidal drives, and their fragile psychic conditions by
reconnecting, facing their personal traumas via talking cures and coming to
believing in the transformative power of love. In addition to personal traumas
triggered by the sudden loss of a father and husband (and in Taiwu and
Kehinde’s case by sexual abuse at the hands of their uncle in Nigeria), Fola
Savage and Kweku Sai, too, have to struggle with their own postcolonial angst
and muted traumatic family histories full of extreme forms of colonial atroc-
ity, racism, and the brutal experience of ethnic conflict between the Hausa
and Igbo, the anti-Igbo pogroms, the victimization and killing of Yoruba,
and the Nigerian civil war.
Ghana Must Go is a novel full of colors and visual references to family
photographs (ibid.: 116, 146, 212–13, 233, 251, 310), to the famous Ghanaian
fantasy coffins (ibid.: 232, 261, 294–95), to movies and the work of the “silent-
visual cameraman” (ibid.: 4); while dying Dr. Sai recalls the latter “quietly
filming” scenes of his life “like scenes from a movie” (ibid.: 27). The novel is
replete with architectural ekphrases of classically Ghanaian family houses,11
new cheap show homes, and American houses and apartments (ibid.: 4, 5, 24,
162–63, 185). There are numerous references to paintings as well as the
young but already successful artist Kehinde, based in London and Brooklyn
with “his dealer in Bern” (ibid.: 161). The readers encounter Kehinde after
he has recovered from a suicide attempt: “He was twenty-six, young with the
newness of money, the strangeness of money and fame and the world” (ibid.:
164). In the two-story workspace of his Brooklyn studio, “one work-in-
progress [is] stretched out on the concrete, some seven feet long, so-called
mud-cloth, the new thing, a departure from the portraits he’s made out of
11. Architectural ekphrases have a long tradition that dates back to antiquity. See Statius, Silvae
as well as the letters of Plinius Secundus, in which he described ancient villas (Du Prey 1994;
Rippl 2005: 139 – 42).
276
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/265/528860/0390265.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 13 ──
beadwork since going abroad” (ibid.: 163). Making portraits in beadwork
relies on mixing two art forms that serve the expression of subjectivity and the
self: the art of beadwork, which has existed for many centuries in many parts
of Africa, and the genre of the painted portrait, which since the Renaissance
has been a predominant European genre of self-fashioning. Likewise,
Kehinde’s new technique of portraiture, “mud-cloth,” again belongs to a
well-known artistic African tradition; it is a material charged with symbolic
value, which he sells to Western art collectors. This mixture of artistic tra-
ditions has its parallels in the ethnic mixture of Kehinde’s family with its
Ga, Yoruba, and Scottish roots. Portraiture is the predominant genre in
Kehinde’s oeuvre; even when he sends his younger sister Sadie a birthday
card, it is a portrait: “She holds up the card that he made for her birthday, on
the one side a drawing in simple pastels, brown and violet and orange, her
face vaguely, close up, the other his writing, happy birthday, baby s” (ibid.: 165).
This short ekphrasis is followed by another concise description of nine huge
unfinished portraits of women, depicting the muses and resembling
Kehinde’s twin sister Taiwo, who on a visit to her brother’s studio examines
them studiously: “Nine full-length portraits, the bodies unfinished, but clearly
her face, slightly altered in each, with some object, a lyre or a hymn-book or a
pencil to make the thing plain to non-readers of Greek. On the floor by each
canvas is an index card label. . . . ‘Euterpe, Polyhymnia, Terpsichore, Clio,
Thalia, Erato, Urania, Melpomene, Calliope’” (ibid.: 180). The reader is not
informed whether these unfinished portraits are painted or beadwork, but
the ekphrasis makes clear that they show Taiwo’s features. With his training
as a classicist, Kehinde brings together the African features of his sister’s face
with the Greek muses, thus rewriting the (allegedly) white Greek tradition
while at the same time working through his childhood trauma (of sexual
abuse by his uncle). His hybridized classical Greek muses with their African
features produce a cultural in-between space, inviting the reader to question
the imageofapure“white”antiquityand insteadcontemplatethe mixed roots
of Western civilization and cultural identities in general. Selasi’s ekphrases
are not at all detailed descriptions of works of art; her short ekphrases rather
serve the aim of hybridizing cultures, opening up transcultural spaces, and
making her readers see the entanglement of cultures—an undertaking that
finally also propels Kehinde’s idea of producing and exhibiting a Ghanaian
fantasy coffin as an installation in a Western museum (ibid.: 296).
3.2. “Hyperlinking” Ekphrasis: Teju Cole’s Open City (2011)
Teju Cole is a transcultural American-Nigerian writer, photographer, and
art historian, born in Kalamazoo, Michigan, to Nigerian parents. After
spending his childhood in Lagos, he returned to Michigan in 1992 to attend
Rippl
† The Cultural Work of Ekphrasis
277
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/265/528860/0390265.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 14 ──
college and has since mostly lived in New York City. Like Bulawayo and
Selasi, Cole, too, employs an intermedial aesthetics—ekphrasis in his novel
Open City (2011) and word-photography configurations in his fictional trave-
logue Every Day Is for the Thief (2014 [2007])—to negotiate notions of individual
and collective identification in times of intense globalization, mass migration,
trauma, violence, racism, terrorism, and corruption. These negotiations take
place against the backdrop of today’s media landscapes and the global forms
of communication and interconnectedness our Internet age enables. Cole’s
male protagonists are educated, cosmopolitan city dwellers with migrant
backgrounds.12 They neither live transcultural lives in dire material circum-
stances, nor do they seem to suffer from their in-between identities. While
Julius, the young medical doctor and protagonist of Open City, at first impres-
ses the readers with his minute registrations of city life and his erudite com-
ments on historical, social, political, and aesthetic issues, readers might find
him increasingly perplexing by his striking noncommitment and emotional
detachment from other people.
The stories of immigrant experience, violence, and trauma, which Julius
collects while roaming the transcultural urban spaces of post-9/11 Manhat-
tan and Brussels, have their parallels in Julius’s many comments on and in-
depth discussions of high-cultural art forms:13 classical music (for instance
Gustav Mahler), literature (for instance Paul Claudel), the visual arts (for
instance Jan van Eyck’s and Diego Vela´zquez’s oil paintings and Martin
Munka´csi’s photographs), and urban architecture. Cole’s novel is not plot-
driven but characterized by its descriptive style and predilection for ekphrasis
and intermedial aesthetics.In addition to passingreferences toworksof West-
ern painting and sculpture, readers encounter several extended ekphrases,
among them many of buildings and their ornaments:14
12. For a discussion of cosmopolitanism in Cole’s narratives, see Hallemeier (2013) and Ver-
meulen (2015).
13. Julius rarely produces ekphrases of artworks and artifacts of his African ancestors, and if he
does they are short and unenthusiastic. Only in passing does Julius mention a family trip during
his childhood to cultural landmarks in the interior of Yorubaland (the southwestern parts of
Nigeria) and visits to the historic Deji’s Palace in Akure and the Ooni’s in Ife: “both of them
large traditional royal complexes built of mud brick and decorated with massive carved wooden
pillars showing aspects of Yoruba cosmology: the world of the living, the world of the dead, the
world of the unborn. My mother, deeply interested in the art, explained the iconography to her
mother and me. My father wandered around a little bored” (Cole 2011: 34). These palaces
testify to Nigeria’s rich cultural past with a plethora of tribal art forms shaped by numerous
kingdoms, but compared to Julius’s elaborate descriptions of Western art his references to
Yoruba art and artifacts are sparse. For an introduction to Nigerian art (Nok, Yoruban, Igbo,
Ife, and Hausa), see Egonwa (2011 [1988]) and Adepegba (1995); for a general introduction to
Nigeria, see Falola and Heaton (2008).
14. In addition to the extended architectural ekphrases, ekphrases of photographic images play
a major role in Cole’s novel, in particular ekphrases of documentary photographs by the
278
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/265/528860/0390265.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 15 ──
Across the street from El Malecon [a popular restaurant] was a massive and
architecturally bizarre building. It was built in 1930, and was known back then
as the Loews 175th Street Theatre. Designed by Thomas W. Lamb, it was filled
with glamorous detail — chandeliers, red carpeting, a profusion of architectural orna-
ment within and without — and the terra-cotta elements on the facade drew from Egyptian,
Moorish, Persian, and Art Deco styles. Lamb’s stated aim was to cast a spell of the mysterious
on the “occidental mind,” with the use of “exotic ornaments, colors, and schemes.” . . .
Now, from the doorway of El Malecon, in the waning light of a Friday evening,
it looked quiet. The jumble of architectural styles failed, more than seventy-five
years on, to resolve themselves into something meaningful. Even in its best days,
it must have looked alien in the environment. It looked more so now, still reasonably well
maintained, but utterly out of place, its architecture a world away from that of the small shops, its
grand columns and arches irrelevant to the fatigued immigrants who rarely raised their heads to look
above street level. The spell had faded. (Cole 2011: 234– 35, my italics)
This architectural ekphrasis highlights the exotic ornamental elements of the
building’s facade, which mixes Western and oriental styles to enchant the
Western mind with mysteries. The multicultural ornaments stand in contrast
to the new Christian function of the building whose grandeur now seems out
of place. The spell of the multicultural mixture of styles “had faded” and
neither the old inhabitants of that part of the city nor the new arrivals—the
“fatigued immigrants”—pay tribute to the building’s charming architectural
features: the magic of the spell of multicultural styles translated into “some-
thing meaningful” has definitely dissolved.
While Julius may impress readers with his profound erudition in the arts
and cultural history in general, in fact his description of Loew’s 175th Street
Theater largely resembles the wording used in the Wikipedia entry on this
theater.15 Vermeulen (2015: 97) has commented on Julius’s tendency to con-
stantly make historical connections: “While these historical connections may
seem to underwrite an ethic of cosmopolitan ‘hyperlinking,’ they are deliv-
ered in an insipid tone that also surfaces elsewhere in the novel and that is
inevitably reminiscent of a Wikipedia page.” Vermeulen borrows the term
“hyperlinked text” from Barnard (2009: 209) who uses it to describe the
apparently arbitrary, but fortuitous, linkages between characters and stories
in a film like Alejandro In˜a´rritu’s Babel or a novel like David Mitchell’s
Hungarian-American photographer Martin Munka´csi (1896 – 1963) that depict Germany’s
Nazi past (Cole 2011: 152 – 55). For an in-depth discussion of Munka´csi’s photographic oeuvre
and many additional ekphrases in Cole’s novel, see Neumann and Rippl (2018). For a discus-
sion of architectural ekphrases as an ekphrastic subcategory, see Rippl (2005: 139 – 42, fn. 11).
15. See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_Palace. For a detailed discussion of the paral-
lels between the Wikipedia entry and Cole’s ekphrasis, see Neumann and Rippl (2018).
Rippl
† The Cultural Work of Ekphrasis
279
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/265/528860/0390265.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 16 ──
Ghostwritten with its “broad geographic trajectory” (Barnard 2009: 210). The
characters of hyperlinked novels and films “whether fixed in a particular
locality . . . or hypermobile . . . operate within a linked set of emerging global
conditions” (ibid.: 211). This is certainly the case in Open City, too. While
Vermeulen persuasively reads Cole’s text as a “hyperlinked” text in a met-
aphorical sense, I contend that this “hyperlinking” ought to be taken far more
literally: Julius is not only globally interconnected—that is, “hyperlinked” to/
with all sorts of historical events that happened around the world—but also
“hyperlinked” to/with the Internet and (museum) websites from which he
takes bits and pieces for his ekphrases. What does this copy-and-paste tech-
nique together with Julius’s random accumulation of stories and descriptions
tell us about his mind-set? Living in the digital age with its advanced com-
munication technology and computerization of daily lives, Julius has ready
access to information about images and texts. Taking this into account, Irr
(2014: 2) has discussed Open City as a “digital migrant novel,” an example of
the many “works that address the interconnected global environment of the
new millennium.” In her review of Cole’s novel, Messud (2011: 25) speaks of
our age as one “of rapid technology and the jolly, undiscriminating ephem-
eralizing of culture and knowledge.” This certainly applies to Open City:
instead of offering first impressions and describing architecture, buildings,
paintings, and monuments from scratch—after all ekphrases used to be char-
acters’/writers’ signature pieces, attesting to their wit and acumen—Julius
delivers secondhand and often stenographic descriptions.
This is again the case when during a Christmas holiday in Brussels (chap.
7–11) Julius produces more ekphrases of buildings, monuments, and paint-
ings that at first glance seem to focus on his own aesthetic impressions. These
ekphrases resonate strongly with Belgium’s colonial crimes in the Congo.
The Royal Museums of Fine Art are famous for their iconic paintings, such
as Bruegel’s Landscape with the Fall of Icarus (circa 1560), which Julius men-
tions: “It was time, in any case, to go home, . . . to leave, in the museum next
door, Auden’s Bruegel with its fallen Icarus, and the unforgettable painting
by an anonymous painter of a young girl with a dead sparrow” (Cole 2011:
145).16 Julius does not deliver an ekphrasis of Bruegel’s globally known
painting, but takes a shortcut by referring instead to one of the most famous
ekphrastic poems, W. H. Auden’s “Muse´e des Beaux Arts” written in Brus-
sels in December 1938, the first stanza of which contemplates human suf-
fering that occurs in a nondescript place on the margins and thus goes
16. This anonymous, southern Belgian painting Little Girl with Dead Bird (1500 – 25) is also on
display at the Royal Museums of Fine Art in Brussels, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki
/File:Little_girl_with_dead_bird_mg_2968.jpg.
280
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/265/528860/0390265.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 17 ──
unnoticed.17 This ekphrastic shortcut allows Cole to reactivate in our cul-
tural memory the colonial atrocities committed in the Congo, but for Cole’s
protagonist, they are nothing but yet another atrocious story in his collec-
tion. The technique of embedding a stenographic ekphrasis within another
ekphrasis is a typical feature of Julius’s descriptive style. The fact that many
of Julius’s ekphrases are partly copied from Wikipedia can also be read in
the light of Cole’s criticism of the ekphrastic mode for the latter’s entangle-
ment with an imperial rhetoric of visuality and the hierarchical power
relations it creates. Read this way, Cole’s copy-paste ekphrastic technique
delegitimizes ekphrastic practices as colonial ones.
Obviously, Cole’s novel is an impressive tour through art, musical, and
global cultural history. The novel’s abundance of ekphrases together with its
many comments on media ecologies, global communication, and the pro-
duction of knowledge in our digital age allows us to draw some conclusions.
In Open City, Cole negotiates the sociopolitical and ethical impact of works of
art today by presenting a “hyperlinked” protagonist—hyperlinked to differ-
ent places whose stories of atrocities he contingently accumulates, while at the
same time staying emotionally detached from people and important causes;
his hyperlinked life does not incite engagement. While Julius immerses him-
self in works of art, which sometimes trigger strong emotions, his innumera-
ble stories of human rights violations do not emotionally affect him. Julius
renders them in an “affectless tone” (Vermeulen 2015: 91) and has no desire
for agency or for taking on responsibility for the people in dire circumstances
whom he encounters.
It is with the help of ekphrasis that Cole is able to raise important socio-
political issues. However, he goes far beyond the traditional antagonistic
paradigm of media competition and the paragone. Instead, his ekphrastic aes-
thetic investigates the collaboration of today’s media, that is, the interplay
between literary text, the image, the Internet, social media, culture, and
communication. What is more, the secondhand ekphrases of Cole’s trans-
cultural African protagonist cannot be exclusively explained as postcolonial
attempts at “re-writing colonial history.” Rather, they answer to today’s
global accessibility and migration of images by combining material from a
17. “About suffering they were never wrong,
The old Masters: how well they understood
Its human position: how it takes place
While someone else is eating or opening a window or just walking dully along;
. . .
They never forgot
That even the dreadful martyrdom must run its course
Anyhow in a corner, some untidy spot”
(Auden 1979 [1939]: 146 – 47).
Rippl
† The Cultural Work of Ekphrasis
281
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/265/528860/0390265.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 18 ──
plethora of cultures, thus showcasing cultural interrelations, networks, and
translations, while at the same time presenting a young hyperlinked male
immigrant who cannot emotionally link up with the stories he has randomly
collected.
4. Conclusion: The Cultural-Critical Work of Ekphrasis Today
The numerous ekphrases we have encountered in these three novels dem-
onstrate that ekphrasis is a ubiquitous cultural phenomenon that has ex-
panded with respect to the objects described—they are no longer restricted
to the field of high art, but also cover photographs, postcards, TV pictures,
and other images circulated by mass media. Recent Anglophone transcul-
tural novels such as Bulawayo’s, Selasi’s, and Cole’s take an increasing inter-
est in developing a new ekphrastic aesthetic. They are investigations in
cultural history, mediascapes, and the arts, both highbrow and popular. In
Bulawayo’s novel, it is the gaze of her protagonist Darling that allows readers
to establish visual contact zones and transcultural spaces of comparison. The
numerous abbreviated as well as extended ekphrases we have encountered
demonstrate how ekphrasis is being “transcultured”: Bulawayo’s and Selasi’s
migrant protagonists produce ekphrases of works of art that either merge
African and European artistic modes and genres or present African artworks
and artifacts such as batik painting and masks, which do not belong to the
Western canon of ekphrastic literary writing and have thus not yet received
much scholarly attention. Both Bulawayo and Selasi invite their readers to
think about Western systems of cultural value, cultural hierarchies, and sym-
bolic capital as well as spaces of translation and transculturation. In this sense
their ekphrases are “ethical ekphrases” (Rippl 2015b) because they raise
questions about hidden epistemologies and ideological agendas materializing
in literary/artistic modes, genres, and canons. By investigating today’s word-
image configurations, by renegotiating cultural hierarchies, and by hyper-
linking and transculturating ekphrasis and thus opening up the ekphrastic
literary canon, Bulawayo, Selasi, and Cole demonstrate that ekphrasis today
serves a range of important epistemological, cultural-critical, ethical, and
sociopolitical functions. Of course, ekphrasis can and has been (ab)used as
a discourse of power based on binary thought and a politics of dualisms that
denigrate the other. Yet it also has a transformative potential that allows for
accommodating and renegotiating otherness, be it medial, ethnic, cultural,
religious, or gender-related (see Neumann 2015; Neumann and Rippl 2018).
282
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/265/528860/0390265.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 19 ──
References
Achebe, Chinua
2001 [1958] Things Fall Apart (London: Penguin).
Adepegba, C. O.
1995 Nigerian Art: Its Traditions and Modern Tendencies (Alakia/Ibadan: Jodad).
Aspden, Peter
2010 “Man in the News: Jonathan Franzen,” Financial Times, September 10, www.ft.com
/cms/s/0/4c23c2a4– bd0d-11df-954b-00144feab49a.html?siteedition¼intl#axzz4J0EB5
Ljj.
Attia, Kader
2014 Transformations (Leipzig: Spector).
Auden, W. H.
1979 [1939] “Muse´e des Beaux Arts.” In Collected Essays, edited by Edward Mendelson,
146 – 47 (New York: Random House).
Barnard, Rita
2009 “Fictions of the Global,” Novel: A Forum on Fiction 42, no. 2: 207 – 15.
Behluli, Sofie, and Gabriele Rippl
2017 “Ekphrasis in the Digital Age,” Digitalita¨t und literarische Netz-Werke Antikanon 2: 131 – 76.
Brosch, Renate
2015 “Images in Narrative Literature: Cognitive Experience and Iconic Moments.” In
Handbook of Intermediality, edited by Gabriele Rippl, 343 – 60 (Berlin: De Gruyter).
2018 “Introduction,” Poetics Today 39, no. 2: 225 – 44.
Bruhn, Siglind
2000 Musical Ekphrasis. Composers Responding to Poetry and Painting (Hillsdale, NY: Pendragon).
Bulawayo, NoViolet
2014 We Need New Names (London: Vintage).
Cole, Teju
2011 Open City (New York: Random House).
2014 [2007] Every Day Is for the Thief (New York: Random House).
Do¨ring, Tobias
2002 Caribbean-English Passages: Intertextuality in a Postcolonial Tradition (London: Routledge).
Du Prey, Pierre de la Ruffinie`re
1994 The Villas of Pliny: From Antiquity to Posterity (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Egonwa, Osa D.
2011 [1988] Nigerian Art: Introductory Notes (Sango/Ibadan: Ababa).
Emery, Mary Lou
2007 Modernism, the Visual, and Caribbean Literature (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Falola, Toyin, and Matthew M. Heaton
2008 A History of Nigeria (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Hallemeier, Katherine
2013 “Literary Cosmopolitanism in Teju Cole’s Every Day Is for the Thief and Open City,” Ariel:
A Review of International English Literature 44, nos. 2 – 3: 239 – 50.
Hallet, Wolfgang
2009 “The Multimodal Novel: The Integration of Modes and Media in Novelistic Narra-
tion.” In Narratology in the Age of Interdisciplinary Narrative Research, edited by Sandra Heinen
and Roy Sommer, 129 – 53 (Berlin: De Gruyter).
2014 “The Rise of the Multimodal Novel: Generic Change and Its Narratological Impli-
cations.” In Storyworlds across Media: Towards a Media-Conscious Narratology, edited by Marie-
Laure Ryan and Jan-Noe¨l Thon, 151 – 72 (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press).
2015 “A Methodology of Intermediality in Literary Studies.” In Handbook of Intermediality:
Literature — Image — Sound — Music, edited by Gabriele Rippl, 605 – 18 (Berlin: De Gruyter).
Rippl
† The Cultural Work of Ekphrasis
283
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/265/528860/0390265.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 20 ──
Hayles, N. Katherine
2008 Electronic Literature. New Horizons for the Literary (Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame).
Heffernan, James A. W.
1993 The Museum of Words: The Poetics of Ekphrasis from Homer to Ashberry (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press).
2015 “Ekphrasis: Theory.” In Handbook of Intermediality: Literature — Image — Sound — Music,
edited by Gabriele Rippl, 35 – 49 (Berlin: De Gruyter).
Hustvedt, Siri
2003 What I Loved (London: Hodder and Stoughton).
2014 The Blazing World (New York: Simon and Schuster).
Irr, Caren
2014 Toward the Geopolitical Novel: U.S. Fiction in the Twenty-First Century (New York: Columbia
University Press).
Jha, Raj Kamal
2007 Fireproof (London: Picador).
Kafalenos, Emma
2012 “The Polysemy of Looking: Reading Ekphrasis alongside Images in Calvino’s Castle of
Crossed Destinies and Vargas Llosa’s In Praise of the Stepmother,” Poetics Today 33, no. 1: 27 – 57.
Kennedy, David
2012 The Ekphrastic Encounter in Contemporary British Poetry and Elsewhere (Farnham: Ashgate).
2015 “Ekphrasis and Poetry.” In Handbook of Intermediality: Literature — Image — Sound — Music,
edited by Gabriele Rippl, 82 – 91 (Berlin: De Gruyter).
Klarer, Mario
1999 “Introduction,” Word & Image 15, no. 1: 1 – 4.
Loizeaux, Elizabeth Bergman
2008 Twentieth-Century Poetry and the Visual Arts (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Louvel, Liliane
2011 [1998] Poetics of the Iconotext, translated by Laurence Petit (Farnham: Ashgate).
Mack, John
2013 [1994] “African Masking.” In Masks. The Art of Expression, edited by John Mack, 32 – 55
(London: The British Museum Press).
Messud, Claire
2011 “The Secret Sharer” (Review of Cole, Open City), The New York Review of Books 58, no. 12:
25 – 27.
Mitchell, W. J. T.
1992 “Ekphrasis and the Other,” South Atlantic Quarterly 91, no. 3: 695 – 719.
Neumann, Birgit
2015 “Intermedial Negotiations: Postcolonial Literatures.” In Handbook of Intermediality: Lit-
erature — Image — Sound — Music, edited by Gabriele Rippl, 512 – 29 (Berlin: De Gruyter).
2016 “Postcolonial Ekphrasis and Counter-Visions in Derek Walcott’s Tiepolo’s Hound
Contacts, Contests, and Translations,” Zeitschrift fu¨r Anglistik und Amerikanistik 64, no. 4:
(forthcoming).
Neumann, Birgit, and Gabriele Rippl
2018 Intermedial Aesthetics: Verbal-Visual Configurations in Postcolonial Literature: (forthcoming).
Rajewsky, Irina O.
2002 Intermedialita¨t (Tu¨bingen: Francke).
2005 “Intermediality, Intertextuality, and Remediation: A Literary Perspective on Interme-
diality,” Interme´dialite´s 6: 43 – 64.
2010 “Border Talks: The Problematic Status of Media Borders in the Current Debate about
Intermediality.” In Media Borders, Multimodality, and Intermediality, edited by Lars Ellestro¨m,
51 – 68 (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan).
284
Poetics Today 39:2
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/265/528860/0390265.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025


── PAGE 21 ──
Rippl, Gabriele
2005 Beschreibungskunst: Zur intermedialen Poetik angloamerikanischer Ikontexte (1880 – 2000) (Munich:
Fink).
2010 “English Literature and Its Other: Towards a Poetics of Intermediality.” In Imagescapes:
Studies in Intermediality, edited by Christian Emden and Gabriele Rippl, 39 – 65 (Oxford:
Peter Lang).
2015a “Introduction.” In Handbook of Intermediality: Literature — Image — Sound — Music, edited
by Gabriele Rippl, 1 – 31 (Berlin: De Gruyter).
2015b “Postcolonial Ekphrasis in the Contemporary Anglophone Indian Novel.” In Hand-
book of Intermediality: Literature — Image — Sound — Music, edited by Gabriele Rippl, 128 – 55
(Berlin: De Gruyter).
Rippl, Gabriele, and Simone Winko
2013 Metzler Handbuch Kanon und Wertung (Stuttgart: Metzler).
Rushdie, Salman
1991 Imaginary Homelands: Essays and Criticism 1981 – 1991 (London: Penguin).
2008 The Enchantress of Florence (London: Random House).
Selasi, Taiye
2005 “Bye-Bye Barbar,” The LIP #5 AFRICA, March 3, http://thelip.robertsharp.co.uk
/?p¼76.
2013 Ghana Must Go (New York: Penguin).
Tabbi, Joseph, and Michael Wutz
1997 Reading Matters: Narrative in the New Media Ecology (Ithaca: Cornell University Press).
Tartt, Donna
2013 The Goldfinch (New York: Little, Brown and Company).
Updike, John
2002 Seek My Face (London: Hamish Hamilton).
Vermeulen, Pieter
2015 Contemporary Literature and the End of the Novel (Houndsmills/Basingstoke: Palgrave Mac-
millan).
Wasihun, Betiel
2016 “Afropolitan Writing.” In Handbook of Transatlantic North American Studies, edited by Julia
Straub, 391 – 410 (Berlin: De Gruyter).
Webb, Ruth
2009 Ekphrasis, Imagination, and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice (Farnham:
Ashgate).
Wolf, Werner
2005 “Intermediality.” In Routledge Encyclopedia of Narrative Theory, edited by David Herman,
Manfred Jahn, and Marie-Laure Ryan, 252 – 56 (London: Routledge).
Yacobi, Tamar
1995 “Pictorial Models and Narrative Ekphrasis,” Poetics Today 16, no. 4: 599 – 649.
1997 “Verbal Frames and Ekphrastic Figuration.” In Interart Poetics: Essays on the Interrelations of
the Arts and Media, edited by Ulla-Britta Lagerroth, Hans Lund, and Erik Hedling, 35 – 46
(Amsterdam: Rodopi).
2013 “Ekphrastic Double Exposure and the Museum Book of Poetry,” Poetics Today 34, nos.
1 – 2: 1 – 52.
Rippl
† The Cultural Work of Ekphrasis
285
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/poetics-today/article-pdf/39/2/265/528860/0390265.pdf by Georgia Tech Library user on 26 December 2025
