# Writing and Filming the Painting: Ekphrasis in Literature and Film.
# Source: Writing_and_Filming_the_Painting_Ekphrasis_in_Lite..._----_(Chapter_1_Toward_a_Definition_of_Ekphrasis_in_Literature_and_Film).pdf
# BibTeX key: sager_eidt_writing_2008
# Zotero dir: 3115
# Extracted chars: 54648
# Format: PDF
============================================================

── PAGE 1 ──
 
Chapter 1  
 
Toward a Definition of Ekphrasis  
in Literature and Film 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
The classical figure of ekphrasis has become an increasingly popular critical 
concept in recent years. A keyword search on the MLA international 
bibliography results in 468 articles, book chapters, books, and dissertations, 
of which 177 were published in the last five years. Whereas traditionally 
ekphrasis was confined to poems that describe or analyze works of art, it is 
now generally accepted and used as a term that applies to all literary genres, 
that is, novel, drama, as well as essay. In spite of the expansion and 
popularity of this concept, however, it has not yet been applied to film. In the 
pages to follow I will contend that the concept of ekphrasis is applicable to 
film as well. Moreover, I will argue that ekphrasis can function as a useful 
tool to explore many of the issues at heart in the relationship between words 
and images which are central to the filmic discourse and the hybrid, 
collaborative nature of the cinematic medium. 
The term ekphrasis is generally used to refer to works of poetry and prose 
that talk about or incorporate visual works of art. Definitions of ekphrasis, 
then, have been anchored traditionally in a particular modality: verbal 
discourses that directly verbalize one or more visual images, often discussed 
in terms of a power struggle between author and painter. Film’s relationship 
with painting, although never discussed in terms of ekphrasis, has similarly 
been seen in terms of a competition: critics have traditionally rejected film’s 
ability to do justice to art works and have accused film of not being true to 
the painting, of fragmenting it.1 As I will show in this chapter as I outline the 
historical evolution of ekphrasis and current research on film-painting 
relationships, similar issues are at play in the relationships between literary 
texts and paintings, and films and paintings, but this connection has so far not 
been explored. This study investigates that missing dimension.  
                                                 
1  
André Bazin takes up this criticism and argues against it in his “Painting and Cinema”, in 
What is Cinema? Trans. by Hugh Gray (Berkeley and Los Angeles: U of California P, 
1967), pp.164-72 (esp. pp. 164-66). 
Sager, E. L. M. (2008). Writing and filming the painting : Ekphrasis in literature and film. BRILL.
Created from gatech on 2025-10-28 16:53:12.
Copyright © 2008. BRILL. All rights reserved.


── PAGE 2 ──
Whereas heretofore theorists have used ekphrasis to talk about the visual 
arts in poetry and prose, they have not identified the relationship between 
film and painting, or the triad of painting, novel and film, as similarly 
informed by an “ekphrastic ambition”2 and the ways in which the resultant 
sender/receiver relationships reshape the reader or viewer perceptions of the 
artworks depicted. These relationships alter the social power and impact of 
the depicted art for the reader or viewer. In the chapters that follow I compare 
the verbal and visual characteristics of film and literary genres that depict art. 
By applying my expanded definition of ekphrasis as an interpretive tool, I 
demonstrate how different genres in either modality influence the way the 
reader or viewer reconstructs the implications of a work of art. In my 
conclusion I will suggest why, in the age of information and media influence, 
it becomes increasingly important to think beyond the traditional boundaries 
between visual and verbal arts as well as between academic disciplines, and I 
discuss the reason for what could be called critic’s “ekphrastic fear” in films.3 
 
 
The Aesthetics of Ekphrasis 
 
The Western discourse on ekphrasis has largely “developed under the 
auspices of Horace’s comparison ‘ut pictura poesis’,”4  a phrase which has 
often been misunderstood as an imperative rather than a comparison between 
the production of visual representations in poetry and in painting. A century 
after Horace, Plutarch cites a phrase by the 6th-century BCE writer, Simonide 
of Keos, that takes the comparison even further: “painting is mute poetry and 
poetry is a speaking picture.”5 Comparisons between poetry and painting are 
also made in Plato’s Republic (Book X, 605) and Aristotle’s Poetics (9.16-
21). Plato banned all mimetic art from his Republic, because it makes 
                                                 
2  
Murray Krieger uses this term to describe the desire of the literary arts to “overcome the 
arbitrariness of the verbal sign by aping the natural sign of the visual arts.” Ekphrasis: The 
Illusion of the Natural Sign (Baltimore and London: The Johns Hopkins UP, 1992), p. 14. 
3  
W.J.T. Mitchell discusses this term as critics’ resistance against ekphrasis and its 
collapsing of the border between visual and verbal mediation in his “Ekphrasis and the 
Other,” Picture Theory (Chicago and London: The U of Chicago P, 1994), pp. 154-56. 
Applied to film, I use this term to describe the resistance to ekphrasis and desire for purity 
in the two visual genres film and painting. 
4  
Antonella Braida, and Giuliana Pieri, introduction, Image and Word: Reflections of Art and 
literature from the Middle Ages to the Present. (Oxford: European Humanities Research 
Centre, 2003), pp. 1-14 (p. 3). 
5  
Henryk Markiewicz, “Ut Pictura Poesis: A History of the Topos and the Problem”, New 
Literary History 18.3 (1987), 535-58 (p. 535). 
 
10 
Sager, E. L. M. (2008). Writing and filming the painting : Ekphrasis in literature and film. BRILL.
Created from gatech on 2025-10-28 16:53:12.
Copyright © 2008. BRILL. All rights reserved.


── PAGE 3 ──
“phantoms that are very far removed from the truth,” and is thus harmful to 
the soul.6 Rescuing mimetic art from Plato’s attack, Aristotle develops the 
parallel between poetry and painting further. He emphasizes that the object of 
both arts is the imitation of human nature in action, but their means are 
different: Poetry uses language, rhythm and harmony, while painting uses 
color and form. 
Plato’s followers have, for centuries, emphasized the “inferiority” of 
words to images with regard to their mimetic faithfulness of representation.7 
The rhetorical device of enargeia was thus a regular scholastic exercise of 
using words to create such a vivid, visual description that the object is placed 
before the listener’s or reader’s inner eye.8 Enargeia also encompassed 
ekphrasis as a form of vivid evocation. Used as a rhetorical device, ekphrasis 
was defined in terms of its effect on an audience by Theon as “expository 
speech which vividly brings the subject before our eyes.”9 Like enargeia, 
ekphrasis marks the desire to overcome the arbitrariness of the verbal sign by 
aspiring to the natural sign of the visual arts.10 One of the earliest and most 
famous examples of literary ekphrasis is Homer’s description of Achilles’ 
shield in book 18 of the Iliad, in which ekphrasis functions as a device to 
make the listeners re-create the shield in their minds’ eyes.  
During the Middle Ages, the “ut pictura poesis” formula remained 
popular, but its terms of comparison began to shift. Writers such as 
Augustine emphasized the greater difficulty of the reception of poetry, which 
made it more valuable than painting. Moreover, writing was also considered 
to be more capable of encompassing spiritual matters, and thus to have 
“greater moral and religious value” than painting, and to offer “more lasting 
satisfaction”11. This devaluation of painting is also reflected in its absence 
from the seven liberal arts, which consisted of the trivium (grammar, rhetoric, 
and dialectic), and the quadrivium (arithmetic, geometry, astronomy and 
music). Painting and sculpture were considered manual rather than 
                                                 
6  
The Republic of Plato, ed., transl., and  introd. by Allan Bloom (New York: Basic Books, 
1968), p. 289. 
7  
Murray Krieger, Ekphrasis: The Illusion of the Natural Sign (Baltimore and London: The 
Johns Hopkins UP, 1992), p. 14. 
8  
Cf. Jean H. Hagstrum, The Sister Arts: The Tradition of Literary Pictorialism and English 
Poetry from Dryden to Gray (Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press, 1958), p. 
29; Krieger , p. 14. 
9  
William H. Race, “Ekphrasis”, in The New Princeton Encyclopedia of Poetry and Poetics, 
ed. by Alex Preminger and T.V.F. Brogan (Princeton, NJ: Princeton UP, 1993), pp. 320-
321 (p. 320).  
10  
Cf. Krieger, pp. 10-12. 
11  
Markiewicz, p. 537. 
 
11
Sager, E. L. M. (2008). Writing and filming the painting : Ekphrasis in literature and film. BRILL.
Created from gatech on 2025-10-28 16:53:12.
Copyright © 2008. BRILL. All rights reserved.


── PAGE 4 ──
intellectual labor and therefore classified with the mechanical arts. In the 
centuries that followed, painters and sculptors struggled to combat their 
status as artisans and imitators, rather than artists and creators, and to 
reaffirm the intellectual nature of their work. 
One of the first to counter that hierarchy was Leon Battista Alberti, whose 
treatise on art, Della Pittura (1435), reasserts the painter’s primacy, as it is he 
who excites the imagination the most (cf. Braida and Pieri 5). Since Alberti, 
this contest for the representational superiority between the sister arts is know 
as paragone. In the Renaissance, it was Leonardo da Vinci who reclaimed the 
prominent place of the visual arts the most fervently in his Paragone (ca. 
1510), reversing Simonides’ comparison by claiming that if painting is “mute 
poetry,” then poetry is “blind painting.”12 While Leonardo sought to prove 
the superiority of the visual arts over poetry, Lessing, in his Laokoon (1766), 
attempts to reverse that hierarchy by drawing strict boundaries between the 
representational realms of poetry and painting. Whereas poetry is best suited 
to represent actions in time due to the temporal nature of its reception, 
painting can only represent a single pregnant moment in space since it is 
perceived as a static object. In other words, Lessing distinguishes the creation 
of mental images in time from the static nature of the physical painting. 
Because of its ability to excite mental pictures in a temporal sequence, poetry 
is better able to create an illusion of reality. Thus, although strongly opposed 
to ekphrasis because of its mingling of painting and poetry, he nevertheless 
espouses the energetic creation of visual images through language.13 
Lessing’s notions of time and space have remained fundamental to the 
analysis of ekphrasis to this day.14 For example, Murray Krieger’s Ekphrasis: 
The Illusion of the Natural Sign (1992) defines ekphrasis as a device to 
“interrupt the temporality of discourse, to freeze it during its indulgence in 
spatial exploration” (p. 7) and his concept of the “ekphrastic principle” 
includes those poems which seek to emulate the pictorial or sculptural arts by 
achieving a kind of spatiality. But while ekphrasis for the Greeks implied a 
visual impact on the mind’s eye of the listener, today the real or fictional art 
object itself is the occasion for the poem, which seeks to render that visual 
                                                 
12  
Leonardo da Vinci, Leonardo da Vinci’s Paragone: Critical Interpretation with a new 
Edition of the Text in the Codex Urbinas, ed. Claire J. Farago (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1992), p. 
209. 
13  
Alexandra Wettlaufer, In the Mind’s Eye: The Visual Impulse in Diderot, Baudelaire and 
Ruskin (New York and Amsterdam: Rodopi, 2003), pp. 64-66. 
14  
Cf. W.J.T. Mitchell, “Space and Time: Lessing’s Laokoon and the Politics of Genre”, 
Iconology: Image, Text, Ideology  (Chicago and London: U of Chicago P, 1986), pp. 95-
115 (p. 97). 
 
12 
Sager, E. L. M. (2008). Writing and filming the painting : Ekphrasis in literature and film. BRILL.
Created from gatech on 2025-10-28 16:53:12.
Copyright © 2008. BRILL. All rights reserved.


── PAGE 5 ──
object into words. Thus, ekphrasis today is generally defined as “verbal 
representation of a visual representation.”15  
This twentieth-century usage was coined by Leo Spitzer in 1955 in an 
analysis of Keats’ “Ode on a Grecian Urn.” There he defined ekphrasis as 
“the poetic description of a pictorial or sculptural work of art, which 
description implies, in the words of Théophile Gautier, ‘une transposition 
d’art’, the reproduction through the medium of words of sensuously 
perceptible objets d’art (ut pictura poesis).”16 But inter-art comparisons, that 
is, comparisons between the arts, had already interested René Wellek, who, 
in an article in 1941 discusses “The Parallelism between Literature and the 
Visual Arts.”17 His position is largely a warning against going too far with 
analogies between the arts and against the confusion of the arts by a simple 
transference of terms from one art to another. Instead, he argues, critics 
should look for structural relationships and make use of semiology and their 
concepts of signs, norms and values in inter-art comparisons.  
Similar cautions against generalizations and calls for factually grounded 
structural relationships continued to concern critics throughout the seventies 
and eighties. In “Art and Literature: A Plea for Humility” (1972) Jean Seznec 
emphasizes the need for a factual method which looks for actual contacts 
between art and literature, and pleads for monographic studies of precise, 
fully documented relationships.18 Likewise, Ulrich Weisstein in his chapter 
on “Literature and the Visual Arts” in the first MLA publication dedicated to 
Interrelations of Literature (1982), is primarily concerned with guidelines to 
make valid inter-art comparisons. Like Seznec, he calls for monographic 
studies, limited in object and rigorous in form with a precise and narrow 
choice of topic, and  “conducted in a controlled environment” in order to 
avoid vast syntheses and generalizations.19 In the same year, Wendy Steiner 
published The Colors of Rhetoric, in which she proposes and illustrates a 
structuralist method of inter-art comparisons that seeks parallels while being 
aware of impossibilities of structural correspondences. Similar to Murray 
Krieger, Steiner defines ekphrasis as a description of a “pregnant moment in 
                                                 
15  
James A. W. Heffernan, Museum of Words: The Poetics of Ekphrasis from Homer to 
Ashbery (Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press, 1993), p.  3.  
16  
Leo Spitzer, “The ‘Ode on a Grecian Urn,’ or Content vs. Metagrammar”, Comparative 
Literature 7.3 (1955), 203-25 (p. 207). 
17  
René Wellek, “The Parallelism between Literature and the Visual Arts”, English Institute 
Annual (New York: Columbia UP, 1941), 29-63. 
18  
Jean Seznec, “Art and Literature: A Plea for Humility”, New Literary History 3.3 (1972), 
569-74 (pp. 571-74). 
19  
Ulrich Weisstein, “Literature and the Visual Arts”, in  Interrelations of Literature, ed. 
Baricelli and Gibaldi (New York: MLA, 1982), pp. 251-77 (p. 267). 
 
13
Sager, E. L. M. (2008). Writing and filming the painting : Ekphrasis in literature and film. BRILL.
Created from gatech on 2025-10-28 16:53:12.
Copyright © 2008. BRILL. All rights reserved.


── PAGE 6 ──
painting,” that is as attempt to imitate the visual arts by describing a still 
moment and thereby halting time.20 
 
 
Ekphrasis and Ideology 
 
Whereas these critics have discussed the literature-art relationship largely as 
an aesthetic one, critics from the late eighties on have tended to see the 
relationship as socially and ideologically motivated, as a “dialectical struggle 
in which the opposed terms take on different ideological roles and 
relationships at different moments in history”.21 W.J.T. Mitchell was one of 
the first to discuss inter-art comparisons in terms of social relations. By 
showing how Lessing in his Laokoon connects the difference between 
painting and poetry to that between men and women and the English and the 
French influence, Mitchell demonstrates how Lessing’s attempt to establish 
laws and borders to distinguish the arts is permeated by a rhetoric of political 
economy and social, gender relations. The laws of genre not only shift into 
laws of proper behavior for each gender, but moreover function to segregate 
the arts in “an imperialist design for absorption by the more dominant, 
expansive art”.22 
Similarly, Ernest B. Gilman has discussed this “Imperialism of 
Language” as central to inter-art comparisons since Antiquity, emphasizing 
that the paragone, or the rivalry between the arts, exists not only between the 
disciplines, but also between their academic exponents, art historians and 
literary critics. Alluding to the commonplace of painting as mute poetry and 
poetry as speaking picture, he concludes that “[i]f the image lurks in the heart 
of language as its unspeakable other, then critics should be open to the 
possibility that images harbor a similarly charged connection with language – 
as an invisible other.”23 Likewise, Grant F. Scott discusses ekphrasis as 
appropriation of the “visual other” and as an attempt to “transform and 
master the image by inscribing it.”24 Diverging from critics such as Jean 
Hagstrum, Leo Spitzer and Murray Krieger, who see ekphrasis as “imitation” 
                                                 
20  
Wendy Steiner, The Colors of Rhetoric (Chicago and London: U of Chicago P, 1982), p. 
41. 
21  
Mitchell, “Space”, p. 98. 
22  
Ibid. p. 107. 
23  
Ernest B. Gilman, “Interart Studies and the ‘Imperialism’ of Language,” in Art and 
Literature I, ed. by Wendy Steiner, spec. issue of Poetics Today 10.1 (1989), 5-30 (p.23). 
24  
Grant F. Scott, “The Rhetoric of Dilation: Ekphrasis and Ideology”, Word & Image 7.4 
(1991), 301-10 (p.302). 
 
14 
Sager, E. L. M. (2008). Writing and filming the painting : Ekphrasis in literature and film. BRILL.
Created from gatech on 2025-10-28 16:53:12.
Copyright © 2008. BRILL. All rights reserved.


── PAGE 7 ──
of the visual arts, or as “giving voice” to the image, Scott sees it as “a means 
of […] demonstrating dominance and power.”25 
Specifically, for critics such as Mitchell and Heffernan, this battle is often 
played out in terms of race and gender. Ekphrastic texts project the visual as 
“other to language.”26 In this process of cultural domination, “the self is 
understood to be an active, speaking, seeing subject, while the ‘other’ is 
projected as a passive, seen, and (usually) silent object. […] Like the masses, 
the colonized, the powerless and voiceless everywhere, visual representation 
cannot represent itself; it must be represented by discourse.”27 The “other” 
art is thus defined both in terms of racial otherness as the seen vs. the 
unmarked identity, and in terms of gender as the “expression of a duel 
between male and female gazes”.28  
Despite these ideological battles, Mitchell has argued that there is no 
essential difference between the two arts.29 In other words, neither are the 
visual arts “inherently spatial, static, corporeal, and shapely,” nor are 
“arguments, addresses, ideas, and narratives” proper to language. Although 
the visual and verbal media are different “at the level of sign-types, forms, 
materials of representation, and institutional traditions,”30 Mitchell 
emphasizes that semantically, that is, in terms of “expressing intentions and 
producing effects in a viewer/listener, there is no essential difference between 
texts and images.”31 Thus, in contrast to the restrictive, cautionary warnings 
of earlier critics, for Mitchell “the problem is that we have not gone nearly 
far enough in our exploration of text-image relations.”32 The emphasis has 
thus not only shifted from an aesthetic to a social focus, but also from 
moderation to encouragement and excess. 
However, as Bernhard F. Scholz has shown, the problem today is that 
there is also an excess of definitions, and that the concept of ekphrasis refers 
to a range of practices rather than to a distinct corpus or genre of texts. 
Ekphrasis has been variously defined as a rhetorical figure, that is, in terms of 
its effect on the listener; as a rhetorical exercise, that is, “as a term for a 
(descriptive) genre studied in terms of composition and typical subject 
                                                 
25  
Scott. p. 303. 
26  
Mitchell, Picture Theory, p. 163. 
27  
Ibid., p. 157. 
28  
Heffernan, p. 1. 
29  
Mitchell, “Space”, p.  98; Picture Theory, pp. 159-62; and “Going Too Far With The Sister 
Arts”, in Space, Time, Image, Sign: Essays on Literature and the Visual Arts, ed. by James 
A.W. Heffernan (New York: Peter Lang, 1987), pp. 1-10. 
30  
Mitchell, Pictur Theory, p. 161. 
31  
Ibid., p. 160. 
32  
Mitchell, “Going Too Far”, p. 2. 
 
15
Sager, E. L. M. (2008). Writing and filming the painting : Ekphrasis in literature and film. BRILL.
Created from gatech on 2025-10-28 16:53:12.
Copyright © 2008. BRILL. All rights reserved.


── PAGE 8 ──
matter”;33 as a literary genre, “defined by reference to form and/or subject 
matter”; a macrostructure, “defined in syntactic terms and in terms of the 
materials which are ordered by the macrostructure,” like “plot” or “collage”; 
as an intertextual relation, “defined by its characteristic relation to another 
text”; or broadly as a mode of writing, “to be contrasted with ‘description’, 
‘argumentation’ or ‘dialogue’.”34 Each of these possibilities will lead critics 
to emphasize different features and functions of ekphrasis. In light of this 
absence of consensus about what constitutes the genre of ekphrasis and how 
it is to be distinguished from other similar phenomena, Scholz concludes that 
it might be more fruitful to see it “as complex multi-dimensional multi-
faceted semiotic phenomenon,” as a “term with a ‘family of meanings’ with 
each member of that family calling for a separate definition.”35   
 
 
Expanding the Definition of Ekphrasis 
 
In fact, as Claus Clüver has argued, “contemporary ekphrastic practices have 
subverted the traditional relation of the representational visual text to its 
verbal representation, even to the point of discontinuity.”36 Thus, critics have 
felt the need to redefine the concept of ekphrasis, for its general definition as 
“verbal representation of visual representation” has been increasingly 
perceived as too narrow. Margaret Persin in her book on ekphrasis in 20th-
century Spanish poetry (1997) has expanded the range of ekphrastic objects, 
discussing not only poems about paintings but also about “uncanonical art 
forms such as television, photography, comics, and cinematography.”37 In the 
same year, Claus Clüver proposes a yet more “radical revision of the concept 
that would lead to a considerable extension.”38  This extension consists not 
only in broadening the definition to include as the object of ekphrasis any 
discourse composed in a non-verbal sign system, but moreover, his proposal 
                                                 
33  
Bernhard F. Scholz., “‘Sub Oculos Subiectio’: Quintilian on Ekphrasis and Enargeia”, in 
Pictures into Words: Theoretical and Descriptive Approaches to Ekphrasis, ed. by Valerie 
Robillard and Els Jongeneel (Amsterdam: VU University Press, 1998), pp. 73-99 (p. 73). 
34  
Scholz, pp. 73-74. 
35  
Ibid, p. 75. 
36  
Claus Clüver, “Ekphrasis Reconsidered: On Verbal Representations of Non-Verbal Texts”, 
in Interart Poetics: Essays on the Interrelations of the Arts and Media, ed. by Ulla-Britta 
Lagerroth, Hans Lund, and Erik Hedling (Amsterdam and Atlanta: Rodopi, 1997), pp. 19-
33 (p. 30). 
37  
Margaret Persin, Getting the Picture: The Ekphrastic Principle in Twentieth-Century 
Spanish Poetry (Lewisburg: Bucknell UP; London: Associated UP, 1997), p. 19. 
38  
Clüver, “Ekphrasis”, p. 23. 
 
16 
Sager, E. L. M. (2008). Writing and filming the painting : Ekphrasis in literature and film. BRILL.
Created from gatech on 2025-10-28 16:53:12.
Copyright © 2008. BRILL. All rights reserved.


── PAGE 9 ──
implies that ekphrasis would also include both the tableau vivant and 
theatricalization,39 two terms eminently relevant for the notion of filmic 
ekphrasis.  
Having expanded the second part of the ekphrastic equation, Clüver 
proceeds to revise the first part a year later. Rather than “verbal 
representation” he argues for the term “verbalization” which is less tied to 
mimesis than the traditional term, yet retains a certain degree of enargeia 
inherent in and central to ekphrasis.40 Thus, he defines the concept as “the 
verbalization of real or fictitious texts composed in a non-verbal sign system” 
(49). Likewise, Tamar Yacobi has shown in various essays that ekphrasis can 
include a mere allusion to an “ekphrastic model” or an “ekphrastic simile” of 
no more than one phrase.41 Both generally invoke a pictorial model rather 
than a specific painting (such as a Last Supper, a Crucifixion), but produce 
multiple interconnections and cross-references. They thus function as 
“abbreviated reference to a whole pictorial set of works, which silently refers 
the reader to the original itself for details and extensions.”42  
The most radical re-definition, and most significant one for my purposes, 
has been proposed in 2000 by Siglind Bruhn in her book on Musical 
Ekphrasis and an article based on the introduction of that book a year later.43 
She expands Clüver’s definition of ekphrasis to refer to the “representation in 
one medium of a real or fictitious text composed in another medium.”44 
Musical ekphrasis can thus transpose either a painting or a literary text, and 
the individual studies in her book are in fact devoted to both cases. Bruhn’s 
re-definition is particularly relevant since it contends that the “recreating 
medium need not always be verbal, but can itself be any of the art forms 
other than the one in which the primary ‘text’ is cast.”45 In a footnote, she 
                                                 
39  
Clüver, “Ekphrasis”, p. 26. 
40  
Claus Clüver, “Quotation, Enargeia, and the Function of Ekphrasis”, in Pictures into 
Words: Theoretical and Descriptive Approaches to Ekphrasis, ed. by Valerie Robillard and 
Els Jongeneel (Amsterdam: VU University Press, 1998), pp. 35-52 (p. 45). 
41  
Tamar Yacobi, “The Ekphrastic Model: Forms and Functions”, in Pictures into Words: 
Theoretical and Descriptive Approaches to Ekphrasis, ed. by Valerie Robillard and Els 
Jongeneel (Amsterdam: VU University Press, 1998), pp. 21-34; “Verbal Frames and 
Ekphrastic Figuration,” in Interart Poetics: Essays on the Interrelations of the Arts and 
Media, ed. byUlla-Britta Lagerroth, Hans Lund, and Erik Hedling (Amsterdam and 
Atlanta: Rodopi, 1997), pp. 35-46. 
42  
Yacobi, “Verbal”, p. 42. 
43  
Siglind Bruhn, Musical Ekphrasis: Composers Responding to Poetry and Painting 
(Hillsdale, NY: Pendragon Press, 2000) and “A Concert of Paintings: Musical Ekphrasis in 
the 20th Century,” Poetics Today 22:3 (2001): 551-605. 
44  
Bruhn, Musical, p. 8; “Concert”, p. 559. 
45  
Bruhn, Musical, pp. 7-8. 
 
17
Sager, E. L. M. (2008). Writing and filming the painting : Ekphrasis in literature and film. BRILL.
Created from gatech on 2025-10-28 16:53:12.
Copyright © 2008. BRILL. All rights reserved.


── PAGE 10 ──
points out that Claus Clüver, in his article “On Intersemiotic Transposition” 
has interpreted Charles Demuth’s painting I Saw the Figure Five in Gold as 
intersemiotic transposition of William Carlos William’s poem “The Great 
Figure.”46 Not only do the third and fourth lines of the poem provide the title 
of the painting, but the painting does in fact transpose the poem, including its 
past tense, into pictorial language. Wendy Steiner, in Pictures of Romance 
provides another example of the way in which a work of art transposes a 
novel.47 All of these, as Bruhn emphasizes, are cases of “visual 
representation of verbal representation,”48 thus reversing Heffernan’s well-
known definition of ekphrasis.  
 
 
The Case for Cinematic Ekphrasis 
 
In spite of these attempts to broaden the concept of ekphrasis, the term has 
not yet been applied to film as a medium that can transpose a painting. 
However, one need not go as far as Bruhn’s re-definition to allow for the 
possibility of visual or filmic ekphrasis. Clüver’s above-cited definition of 
ekphrasis as “the verbalization of real or fictitious texts composed in a non-
verbal sign system” would apply equally to poetic ekphrasis as to an 
ekphrastic passage in the stage directions of a drama or in a screenplay. 
Elizabeth Drumm in her discussion of “Ekphrasis in Valle-Inclan’s Comedias 
bárbaras” has shown how ekphrasis is used in the stage directions of that 
drama. Although the ekphrasis is a mere reference to some vague, 
unidentified “retratos antiguos” (old portraits), the trilogy as a whole 
functions as “prolonged ekphrasis of the mute art object.”49 Moreover, 
ekphrasis in this drama does not privilege language, but rather the “rich 
ambiguity” and the “persistent and inscrutable presence”50 of the visual 
image.  
Ekphrastic passages in such texts as dramas and screenplays will be acted 
out and dramatized, and thus lose their purely verbal nature. But will they 
then also lose their potential to be ekphrastic? I would like to extend and 
                                                 
46  
Claus Clüver, “On Intersemiotic Transposition”, in Art and Literature I, ed. by Wendy 
Steiner, spec. issue of Poetics Today 10.1 (1989), 55-90. 
47  
Wendy Steiner, Pictures of Romance: Form Against Context in Painting and Literature. 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988), p. 109. 
48  
Bruhn, Musical, p. 8. 
49  
Elizabeth Drumm, “Ekphrasis in Valle-Inclán's Comedias bárbaras”, Revista de Estudios 
Hispánicos 34.2 (2000), 391-407 (p. 391). 
50  
Ibid., p. 393. 
 
18 
Sager, E. L. M. (2008). Writing and filming the painting : Ekphrasis in literature and film. BRILL.
Created from gatech on 2025-10-28 16:53:12.
Copyright © 2008. BRILL. All rights reserved.


── PAGE 11 ──
combine Clüver’s and Bruhn’s above-mentioned definitions of ekphrasis to 
explicitly include the quotation and dramatization of texts in another medium 
to expand the possibilities of visual and cinematographic ekphrasis.51 I 
therefore define ekphrasis as the verbalization, quotation, or dramatization of 
real or fictitious texts composed in another sign system.  
Like Bruhn, then, I argue that ekphrasis need not be purely verbal. If the 
goal of verbal ekphrasis is to make the reader see, cinematic ekphrasis can 
also be discussed in terms of its effect on the audience. Filmic ekphrasis 
allows the viewer to compare the filmic representation or enactment of the art 
work with the actual work itself, thus creating a synthesis of the two images 
in the viewer’s mind.  With this audience-oriented goal, ekphrasis is closely 
tied to reception. But not only does ekphrasis strive for a creative visual 
effect on the audience, but moreover, it also indicates the writer’s or 
filmmaker’s interpretation, and thus reception of a work of art or an artist’s 
oeuvre. As Gisbert Kranz has noted with regard to the ekphrastic poem and in 
reference to Roman Ingaarden, it is a “concretization of the work of art,” a 
concretization which comprises both the effect produced by the work of art 
and the reception by the recipient.52 Analyzing the literary and filmic 
reception and concretization of a work of art through their ekphrases, we can 
gain insight into the similarities and differences in the interpretation of 
famous works of art in high and in popular culture.  
For this ekphrastic process, this concretization, I prefer to use Bruhn’s 
term “transmedialization,” which she coins by referring to the existence of 
the adjective “-medial” in German as well as French.53 Having shown how 
other terms suggested by literary critics for the ekphrastic process, such as 
transposition, transformation, or translation, invite misreadings and possess 
music-specific meanings, she proposes this term as one that adequately 
captures the essence of that process. While this term seems to convey the 
same meaning as Clüver’s “intersemiotic transposition” (translation or 
transmutation), I find “transmedialization” both simpler and more precise. 
                                                 
51  
However, as Clüver has emphasized with regard to ekphrasis of architecture, the existence 
of ekphrasis in a discourse depends both on how the object is represented, that is, as 
another representation or merely as object, and on the reception of its representation 
(“Ekphrasis Reconsidered”, p. 26). Thus, it would be important to distinguish between 
films that merely show some art works and those in which they fulfill a narrative function. 
52  
Gisbert Kranz, Das Bildgedicht. Theorie – Lexikon – Bilbiographie, vol. 1 (Köln and Wien 
[Cologne and Vienna]: Böhlau Verlag, 1981), p. 158. 
53  
Bruhn, Musical, p. 51 
 
19
Sager, E. L. M. (2008). Writing and filming the painting : Ekphrasis in literature and film. BRILL.
Created from gatech on 2025-10-28 16:53:12.
Copyright © 2008. BRILL. All rights reserved.


── PAGE 12 ──
Moreover, its English usage is prefigured in terms such as “intermedial” and 
“intermediality.”54  
My own reading of films in the light of the ekphrastic process has 
benefited from Siglind Bruhn’s analysis of musical ekphrasis, Claus Clüver’s 
various expansions of literary ekphrasis, and Donna L. Poulton’s discussion 
of the uses of art in film. None of these investigations, however, touches on 
the ability of film to transmedialize a work of art by adapting the pictorial 
into the cinematographic language. In fact, although there are a number of 
studies on film-painting relationships, none has investigated the possibility of 
filmic ekphrasis. However, one does not need to go as far as Zahlten and 
claim that the discourse between art history and film studies has largely been 
denied.55 For example, Angela Dalle Vacche’s anthology The Visual Turn: 
Classical Film Theory and Art History documents the “dialogue between the 
history of art history in the early twentieth century and the history of classical 
film theory”56 and demonstrates that the boundaries between the two 
disciplines are beginning to disappear. However, in most of the scholarly 
practice today, this is not the case. Existing studies on film-art relationships 
generally center on documentaries about artists.57 If feature films are 
considered, scholars generally either look at technical similarities between 
the visual arts and the movies,58 or examine the use of paintings in one 
                                                 
54  
See for example the publication Icons – Texts – Iconotexts: Essays on Ekphrasis and 
Intermediality, ed. by Peter Wagner (Berlin and New York: Walter de Gruyter, 1996). The 
terms “intermedial” and “intermediality” are also used by Claus Clüver in his “On 
Intersemiotic Transposition,” and Valerie Robillard in her “In Pursuit of Ekphrasis (an 
intertextual approach),”  in Pictures into Words: Theoretical and Descriptive Approaches 
to Ekphrasis, ed. by Valerie Robillard and Els Jongeneel (Amsterdam: VU University 
Press, 1998), pp. 53-72. 
55  
Johannes Zahlten, “Die Kunsthistoriker und der Film. Historische Aspekte und künftige 
Möglichkeiten”, in Kunst und Künstler im Film, ed. by Helmut Korte,and Johannes Zahlten 
(Hameln: Verlag C.W. Niemeyer, 1990), pp. 13-19 (p. 13). 
56  
Angela Dalle Vacche, “Introduction: Unexplored Connections in a New Territory”,  in The 
Visual Turn: Classical Film Theory and Art History (New Brunswick, NJ and London: 
Rutgers UP, 2003), pp. 1-29 (p. 1). 
57  
E.g. Art History and Film: Starting from the Arts: A Symposium, Boston, November 14-16, 
1991 (New York: Program for Art on Film, 1992); Simon Howard Dizon, The Image 
Incarnate: On the Documentary Representation of Painting in Film, diss U of Iowa, 2000; 
Catherine Egan and John Egan, “Films About Artists and Their Audiences”, in The 
Mediazation of the Arts,  ed. by Catherine Egan, spec. issue of Perspectives on Film 4 
(1982), 20-30; Günter Minas, Bildende Kunst im Film der Bundesrepublik Deutschland. 
Ergebnisse ener Bestandsaufnahme (Berlin: G.Minas, 1986); Jens Thiele, Das Kunstwerk 
im Film (Bern: Herbert Lang; Frankfurt a.M. and München: Peter Lang, 1976). 
58  
E.g. Angela Dalle Vacche, Cinema and Painting: How Art Is Used in Film (Austin: U of 
Texas P, 1996); Anne Hollander, Moving Pictures (New York: Knopf, 1989). 
 
20 
Sager, E. L. M. (2008). Writing and filming the painting : Ekphrasis in literature and film. BRILL.
Created from gatech on 2025-10-28 16:53:12.
Copyright © 2008. BRILL. All rights reserved.


── PAGE 13 ──
individual film,59 or focus on the role of the artist as portrayed in bio-pictures 
about famous painters, rather than on the art works themselves.60  
 
 
Film and Painting 
 
Relatively few scholars have attempted to outline the various ways in which 
paintings can be used in film. Susan Felleman’s Art in the Cinematic 
Imagination examines a range of ways in which films have incorporated 
works of art, using “psychoanalytical and feminist theory to uncover the 
meanings that the incorporation of art has for and in movies.”61 However, her 
study does not account for different ways in which art may be integrated and 
used in film, and her examples range from films in which art plays a minor 
role as background picture to films about artists without differentiating 
degrees and kinds of filmic appropriation of art.  
Donna L. Poulton in her 1999 dissertation, Moving Images in Art and 
Film, has outlined sixteen categories for the intertextual integration of 
paintings into feature films.62 With her focus on the quotes referring to art 
works in films, several of the categories she outlines could in fact represent 
instances of filmic ekphrasis and will be further discussed in Chapter 2. 
However, of the three categories she analyzes in detail, only one (“Films that 
directly quote paintings,” i.e. in which paintings are directly shown to the 
                                                 
59  
E.g. Jürgen Paech., “La belle captive (1983). Malerei, Roman, Film (Rene Magritte / Alain 
Robbe-Grillet)”, in Literaturverfilmungen, ed. by Franz-Josef Albersmeier and Volker 
Roloff (Frankfurt a.M.: Suhrkamp 1989), pp. 409-436; and Gerd Bauer, “Jean-Luc Godard: 
Ausser Atem/A Bout de Souffle (Frankreich 1959)”, in Kunst und Künstler im Film, ed. by 
Helmut Korte and Johannes Zahlten (Hameln: Verlag C.W. Niemeyer, 1990), pp. 111-121. 
60  
E.g. Ellen Fischer, “Das Künstlerbild im amerikanischen Spielfilm der 50er und 60er 
Jahre,“ in Film, Fernsehen, Video und die Künste: Strategien der Intermedialität, ed. by 
Joachim Paech  (Stuttgart and Weimar: Verlag J.B. Metzler, 1994), pp. 103-113; and John 
A. Walker, Arts & Artists on Screen (Manchester and New York: Manchester UP, 1993). 
Helmut 
Korte’s 
“Kunstwissenschaft 
– 
Medienwissenschaft: 
Methodologische 
Anmerkungen zur Filmanalyse”, in Kunst und Künstler im Film, ed. by Helmut Korte and 
Johannes Zahlten (Hameln: Verlag C.W. Niemeyer, 1990), pp. 21-42 is somewhat of an 
exception, since it is concerned with methodological problems in the analysis of films 
about artists, in the course of which he briefly discusses several such films. However, his 
analysis does not pertain specifically to the transmedialization of the art work  in the film, 
but rather aims at an overall interpretation of the film. 
61  
Susan Felleman, Art in the Cinematic Imagination (Austin: University of Texas Press, 
2006), p. 2. 
62  
Donna Lauren Poulton, Moving Images in Art and Film: The Intertextual and Fluid Use of 
Painting in Cinema (diss Brigham Young University, 1999). 
 
21
Sager, E. L. M. (2008). Writing and filming the painting : Ekphrasis in literature and film. BRILL.
Created from gatech on 2025-10-28 16:53:12.
Copyright © 2008. BRILL. All rights reserved.


── PAGE 14 ──
viewer) could classify as ekphrastic, while the other two neither require a 
(real, fictional, or tableau vivant) image to be used, nor do these films 
provide any verbal discourse about art. 
In contrast to the films Poulton discusses, fiction features about artists, 
usually do include some verbal as well as visual representation of artworks.63 
Yet, John A. Walker, the only scholar so far to have undertaken an extensive 
analysis of such bio-pictures, claims that in focusing on the biography of an 
individual artist, these films generally neglect the artwork or interpret it as 
merely an aspect of the artist’s personality and biography.64 Although this 
may be true for some biographical features, I contend that this negative 
assessment can be challenged and qualified by comparing the ekphrastic use 
of painting in feature films about art and artists with its function in literary 
texts. 
Furthermore, I maintain that it is essential for a full understanding of 
ekphrasis in films to distinguish it from the genre of biographical feature 
films. Cinematic ekphrasis is neither synonymous with nor a subgroup of bio-
features, but can occur in other feature films as well. Moreover, my use of the 
term filmic ekphrasis refers only to particular scenes or sequences, rather 
than signifying a filmic genre. In contrast to ekphrastic poems, which more 
easily classify as a genre due to the compact nature of poetry, in most novels, 
dramas and films, ekphrasis will take up only a quantitatively small aspect of 
the whole work, insufficient to classify as genre.65 So unlike Bruhn’s claim 
with regard to ekphrastic music,66 I do not allege that filmic ekphrasis 
represents a separate genre of films.  
In his essay “Film and Painting” André Bazin also takes up the criticism 
against films about art works. Bazin argues that these films are both 
didactically useful (by bringing the masses to appreciate art and by bringing 
together high and popular culture) and, by uniting high and popular culture 
within themselves, a work of art in their own right. As Bazin emphasizes, 
                                                 
63  
Of course there are some exceptions, such as James Ivory’s Surviving Picasso (1996) or 
Robert Altman’s Vincent and Theo (1990) both of which feature very few representations 
of paintings and very little of the discussions revolve about art. 
64  
Walker, p.19. 
65  
Again, there are some exceptions, in which a whole novel or drama could be considered 
ekphrastic, for example Antonio Buero Vallejo’s drama El sueño de la razón (of which I 
will discuss only one scene in chapter three), E.T.A. Hoffmann’s novella Prinzessin 
Brambilla, which is inspired by a series of etchings by Jacques Callot, Gert Hofmann’s Der 
Blindensturz (1985), a book-length narrative that verbalizes Brueghel’s The Parable of the 
Blind, and Pierre Ajame’s La laitière de Bordeaux d'après le tableau de Fransisco Goya 
(1985), a novella inventing the story behind Goya’s Milkmaid of Bordeaux.  
66  
Bruhn, Musical, pp. xvii-xix. 
 
22 
Sager, E. L. M. (2008). Writing and filming the painting : Ekphrasis in literature and film. BRILL.
Created from gatech on 2025-10-28 16:53:12.
Copyright © 2008. BRILL. All rights reserved.


── PAGE 15 ──
“[t]he film of a painting is an aesthetic symbiosis of screen and painting.”67 
Moreover, he concludes by comparing films about art, such as Resnais’ 
Guernica and Van Gogh, or Pierre Kast’s Goya, to “a certain type of literary 
criticism which is likewise a re-creation – Baudelaire on Delacroix, Valery 
[sic.] on Baudelaire, Malraux on Greco.”68 What Bazin is here referring to is 
various cases of ekphrasis that fall between literature and art history. By 
indicating that films about art are comparable to that type of ekphrasis, Bazin 
emphasizes that these films are, like their literary counterparts, aesthetically 
valuable as well as valuable pieces of art criticism, that is, criticism that is 
itself a work of art.  
Just like literary ekphrasis, its filmic counterpart also relates to the 
formal, stylistic aspects of the re-presentation of the art work through 
cinematographic devices. Unlike the purely verbal nature of most literary 
ekphrases, however, film has at its disposal verbal, visual and auditory (e.g. 
background noises, music) means with which to transmedialize a painting. 
Thus, the discourse of filmic ekphrasis can be constituted by both of the sign 
systems (the verbal and the visual) that are separate and often in competition 
in a literary ekphrasis. In other words, filmic ekphrasis reenacts in the 
cinematographic medium itself the antagonism between word and image that 
is central to the tradition of ekphrasis. In literary ekphrasis, as in films, it is 
often the visual elements that revalue or subvert the written/spoken word. 
Likewise, just as literary ekphrasis often uses the discourse about the image 
as a self-reflective statement on its own status in comparison to the visual 
image, so can the insertion of works of art into a film function as a self-
referential comment on the film as a “moving image” and its relationship to 
the silent, static image. This is particularly the case with films that embody 
pictures in tableaux vivants,69 with which film often “seeks to outdo” the 
static visual representations, and “in the process, it defines its own 
modalities.”70 
                                                 
67  
Bazin, p. 168. 
68   Ibid., p. 169. 
69  
The tableau vivant, the “static embodiment of well-known paintings by human actors” has 
a twofold origin, one of which are Diderot’s bourgeois tragedies, “a paradigmatic moment 
of dramatic intensification during which the actors hold their poses and all motion on the 
stage ceases.” The other origin is pornographic, derived from an eighteenth-century sex 
therapist. Cf. Brigitte Peucker, “Filmic Tableau Vivant: Vermeer, Intermediality, and the 
Real”, in Rites of Realism: Essays on Corporeal Cinema, ed. by Ivone Margulies (Durham, 
NC and London: Duke UP, 2003), pp. 294-314 (p. 294). 
70  
Brigitte Peucker, Incorporating Images: Film and the Rival Arts (Princeton: Princeton UP, 
1995), p. 6. 
 
23
Sager, E. L. M. (2008). Writing and filming the painting : Ekphrasis in literature and film. BRILL.
Created from gatech on 2025-10-28 16:53:12.
Copyright © 2008. BRILL. All rights reserved.


── PAGE 16 ──
However, as my analyses in the chapters that follow will show, filmic 
ekphrasis is not only verbal and visual. My analysis will demonstrate that it 
can also be auditory, thus adding another sign system to the filmic re-
presentation of a work of art, and potentially further heightening the tension 
and interconnections between sign systems. Moreover, filmic ekphrasis can 
forgo all verbal discourse in favor of a purely visual and auditory one, 
examples of which will be discussed in the following chapters. Thus, an 
analysis of ekphrastic scenes or sequences in film is linked to questions such 
as how the various sign systems are interrelated within one medium, if and 
why film privileges one over the other, and how the various sign systems can 
interact to interpret another artistic medium.  
Placing selected feature films about art and artists in the tradition of 
ekphrasis, I explore what the use of paintings in films implies about the social 
roles of art. Who speaks about art and in what contexts? How does art 
function in films to convey social or economic positions? Does the 
relationship between ekphrasis and social power change from text to film? 
Comparing filmic treatments of paintings by Vermeer, Rembrandt, and Goya 
with ekphrases in literary texts, I will examine if and how the medium of 
ekphrasis (i.e. literary or filmic) alters the representation of the visual arts, in 
order to show what the similarities or differences imply about issues such as 
the function of art for the construction of a personal and/or social identity and 
gender roles. Do writers and filmmakers ascribe the same or different roles to 
the function of words and images, of speaking and looking? Does the concept 
of the paragone, the rivalry between words and images, intensify or lose 
relevance in filmic ekphrasis due to film’s status as a hybrid medium? 
In order to delineate how depictions of a particular painter’s works differ 
in literary and cinematic discourse, that is, how the medium shapes the 
interpretation of a particular work of art, I propose to discuss ekphrases of 
artworks by well-known painters who are widely represented in literature and 
film. I believe that the creative process by which a painting is transformed 
into a poem or a narrative text can usefully be compared to the 
transformation of a painting to its cinematic rendering. Just as Siglind Bruhn 
has shown with regard to musical ekphrasis, I allege that the literary and 
filmic rendering of a painting “correspond to a degree that justifies adapting 
the terminology of ekphrasis developed in the literary field.”71 In Chapter 
Two I will therefore develop and discuss a system of ekphrastic categories 
and discuss how they apply to literary texts as well as to films. With the help 
of these categories, I describe varying forms and degrees of ekphrasis in 
                                                 
71  
Bruhn, “Concert”, p. 559. 
 
24 
Sager, E. L. M. (2008). Writing and filming the painting : Ekphrasis in literature and film. BRILL.
Created from gatech on 2025-10-28 16:53:12.
Copyright © 2008. BRILL. All rights reserved.


── PAGE 17 ──
order to provide and illustrate a vocabulary for analyzing the similarities and 
differences of ekphrasis in literature and film. This vocabulary refers to ways 
in which authors and filmmakers can use the visual arts as well as to degrees 
of involvement with them. In comparing the use of ekphrasis in three literary 
genres and film, I will show what different types of ekphrasis predominate in 
each genre and why, and what the predominance of certain categories implies 
with regard to the relationship between words and images in film and literary 
texts. As these comparisons will demonstrate, filmic ekphrases often reveal 
similar power structures as those of literary texts, despite the fact that cinema 
is a hybrid genre itself. Analyzing the similarities and differences between 
literary and filmic ekphrasis, then, will provide insight into the various 
dynamics of words and images in different genres. Furthermore, in discussing 
ekphrasis as a form of reception, this comparison will also highlight the ways 
in which popular, well-known works of high art are received in other high art 
media (poetry, novels, and drama) as well as popular culture (here 
represented by film).  
As a segue into the discussion of these categories and their application to 
film, I discuss the German photographer Thomas Struth’s series of Museum 
Photographs as examples of ekphrasis represented visually. The following 
four chapters deal with the representation of selected works of art, and focus 
on social vs. aesthetic concerns, and issues of gender. In order to minimize 
the scope and range of my study, and thus the danger of generalizations, I 
have limited myself not only to a controlled sample of three artists, Goya, 
Rembrandt, and Vermeer, but even further, to only one work of art or a 
clearly identifiable group by each: Goya’s Capricho 43: El sueño de la razón 
produce monstrous, Rembrandt’s self-portraits, and Vermeer’s paintings of 
single women, particularly Girl with a Pearl Earring and Woman with a 
Pearl Necklace. 
The first three analyses largely focus on aesthetic and socio-political 
concerns, looking at ekphrases on works by Goya and Rembrandt. In chapter 
three, I discuss how Goya’s Capricho 43, El sueño de la razón produce 
monstrous, is used in a poem, a drama, and a film. Chapter four continues 
this analysis of Goya’s etching in a novel and its film version. In all of them, 
ekphrasis functions as a dramatization of the parallel between private-
aesthetic and socio-political conflicts and the artist’s ability to control them 
with his art. In chapter five, on Rembrandt’s self-portraits, I analyze the role 
of ekphrasis as dramatization of the painter’s self-clarification in a screenplay 
and a film. Here, I show how the film tends to intensify the screenplay’s 
interpretation of the artist’s public role play through his self portraits, and 
uses cinematic re-constructions of those self portraits to create its own 
 
25
Sager, E. L. M. (2008). Writing and filming the painting : Ekphrasis in literature and film. BRILL.
Created from gatech on 2025-10-28 16:53:12.
Copyright © 2008. BRILL. All rights reserved.


── PAGE 18 ──
version of “Rembrandt.” In the last chapter I turn to gender issues. Chapter 
six examines two novels and films about Vermeer, analyzing how the novels 
use ekphrasis for female empowerment, whereas the films revert to the 
traditional male gaze and voice and a more socio-political role of art. In 
comparing the changes of the film adaptations of Tracy Chevalier’s Girl with 
a Pearl Earring and Susan Vreeland’s Girl in Hyacinth Blue with regard to 
degree and kind as well as point of view of the ekphrastic scenes, I show how 
the films underscore the socio-political implications of art and use ekphrasis 
to demonstrate male power, while the novels use it as space of female self-
realization. 
In the concluding chapter seven I attempt to draw some inferences from 
the preceding chapters and discuss whether film does in fact appropriate the 
image by giving it a voice as well as a living body in representing it as a 
tableau, for example, or whether it allows the image to signify on its own by 
representing it visually. What are the different implications of purely verbal 
as opposed to mostly visual ekphrasis? And how do the four different 
ekphrastic categories (attributive, depictive, interpretive, and dramatic) affect 
the interpretation of the work of art? In so far as ekphrasis can be said to be a 
self-reflective genre, to what degree are the four categories self-referential, 
and what role does the paragone play in visual, filmic ekphrasis? 
 
26 
Sager, E. L. M. (2008). Writing and filming the painting : Ekphrasis in literature and film. BRILL.
Created from gatech on 2025-10-28 16:53:12.
Copyright © 2008. BRILL. All rights reserved.
