# {MotionCtrl
# Source: Wang et al. - 2024 - MotionCtrl A Unified and Flexible Motion Controller for Video Generation.pdf
# BibTeX key: wang_motionctrl_2024
# Zotero dir: 3288
# Extracted chars: 51531
# Format: PDF
============================================================

── PAGE 1 ──
.
.
Latest updates: hps://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3641519.3657518
.
.
RESEARCH-ARTICLE
MotionCtrl: A Unified and Flexible Motion Controller for Video
Generation
ZHOUXIA WANG, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore City, Singapore
.
ZIYANG YUAN, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
.
XINTAO WANG, Tencent ARC, Shenzhen, China
.
YAOWEI LI, Peking University, Beijing, China
.
TIANSHUI CHEN, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China
.
MENGHAN XIA, Tencent, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China
.
View all
.
.
Open Access Support provided by:
.
Tencent ARC
.
Nanyang Technological University
.
Tencent
.
Peking University
.
Tsinghua University
.
The University of Hong Kong
.
View all
PDF Download
3641519.3657518.pdf
14 January 2026
Total Citations: 87
Total Downloads: 1519
.
.
Published: 13 July 2024
.
.
Citation in BibTeX format
.
.
SIGGRAPH '24: Special Interest Group
on Computer Graphics and Interactive
Techniques Conference
July 27 - August 1, 2024
CO, Denver, USA
.
.
Conference Sponsors:
SIGGRAPH
SIGGRAPH '24: ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers (July 2024)
hps://doi.org/10.1145/3641519.3657518
ISBN: 9798400705250
.


── PAGE 2 ──
MotionCtrl: A Unified and Flexible Motion Controller for Video
Generation
Zhouxia Wang∗
wzhoux@connect.hku.hk
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological
University
Singapore
Ziyang Yuan∗
yuanzy22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Tsinghua University
China
Xintao Wang†
xintao.alpha@gmail.com
ARC Lab, Tencent PCG
China
Yaowei Li∗
ywl@stu.pku.edu.cn
Peking University
China
Tianshui Chen
tianshuichen@gmail.com
Guangdong University of Technology
China
Menghan Xia
menghanxyz@gmail.com
Tencent AI Lab
China
Ping Luo†
pluo@cs.hku.hk
University of Hong Kong
China
Ying Shan
yingsshan@tencent.com
ARC Lab, Tencent PCG
China
(a) Prompt: A cute dog sitting on the green grass.
(b) Prompt: The rose swaying in the wind.
Camera Poses
Trajectory
Camera Poses
(c) Prompt: The rose swaying in the wind.
Figure 1: Control Results of MotionCtrl. MotionCtrl is capable of controlling both camera motion and object motion in videos
produced by a video generation model. It can also simultaneously control both types of motion within the same video. We
highly encourage readers to check our project page for video results, which cannot be well demonstrated by still images.
∗Works done while as an intern in ARC Lab, Tencent PCG.
†Corresponding author.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGGRAPH Conference Papers ’24, July 27–August 01, 2024, Denver, CO, USA
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0525-0/24/07
https://doi.org/10.1145/3641519.3657518


── PAGE 3 ──
SIGGRAPH Conference Papers ’24, July 27–August 01, 2024, Denver, CO, USA
Z. Wang, Z. Yuan, X. Wang, Y. Li, T. Chen, M. Xia, P. Luo, and Y. Shan
ABSTRACT
Motions in a video primarily consist of camera motion, induced by
camera movement, and object motion, resulting from object move-
ment. Accurate control of both camera and object motion is essential
for video generation. However, existing works either mainly focus
on one type of motion or do not clearly distinguish between the two,
limiting their control capabilities and diversity. Therefore, this pa-
per presents MotionCtrl, a unified and flexible motion controller for
video generation designed to effectively and independently control
camera and object motion. The architecture and training strategy of
MotionCtrl are carefully devised, taking into account the inherent
properties of camera motion, object motion, and imperfect training
data. Compared to previous methods, MotionCtrl offers three main
advantages: 1) It effectively and independently controls camera mo-
tion and object motion, enabling more fine-grained motion control
and facilitating flexible and diverse combinations of both types of
motion. 2) Its motion conditions are determined by camera poses
and trajectories, which are appearance-free and minimally impact
the appearance or shape of objects in generated videos. 3) It is a
relatively generalizable model that can adapt to a wide array of
camera poses and trajectories once trained. Extensive qualitative
and quantitative experiments have been conducted to demonstrate
the superiority of MotionCtrl over existing methods. Project page:
https://wzhouxiff.github.io/projects/MotionCtrl/.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Computing methodologies →Computer vision.
KEYWORDS
AIGC, video generation, motion control
ACM Reference Format:
Zhouxia Wang, Ziyang Yuan, Xintao Wang, Yaowei Li, Tianshui Chen,
Menghan Xia, Ping Luo, and Ying Shan. 2024. MotionCtrl: A Unified and
Flexible Motion Controller for Video Generation. In Special Interest Group on
Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques Conference Conference Papers
’24 (SIGGRAPH Conference Papers ’24), July 27–August 01, 2024, Denver, CO,
USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 11 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3641519.
3657518
1
INTRODUCTION
Video generation, such as text-to-video (T2V) generation [Blattmann
et al. 2023b; Chen et al. 2023b; He et al. 2022; Ho et al. 2022; Singer
et al. 2022; Zhou et al. 2022] aims to produce diverse and high-
quality videos that conform to given text prompts. Unlike image
generation [Ding et al. 2021; Ramesh et al. 2022, 2021; Rombach
et al. 2022; Saharia et al. 2022; Zhou et al. 2021], which focuses
on generating a single image, video generation necessitates the
creation of consistent and fluent motion among a sequence of gen-
erated images. Consequently, motion control plays a significantly
crucial role in video generation, yet it has received limited attention
in recent research.
In a video, there are primarily two types of motion: global motion
induced by camera movements and local motion resulting from
object movements (examples are referred to the zoom out camera
poses and swaying rose in Fig. 1 (c)). It should be noted that these
two motions will be consistently referred to as camera motion and
object motion throughout the paper, respectively. However, most
previous works related to motion control in video generation either
primarily focus on one of the motions or lack a clear distinction
between these two types of motion. For instance, AnimateDiff [Guo
et al. 2023], Gen-2 [Esser et al. 2023], and PikaLab [pik [n. d.]]
mainly execute or trigger camera motion control using indepen-
dent LoRA [Hu et al. 2021] models or extra camera parameters
(such as "-camera zoom in" in PikaLab [pik [n. d.]]). VideoCom-
poser [Wang et al. 2023] and DragNUWA [Yin et al. 2023a] im-
plement both camera motion and object motion using the same
conditions: motion vector in VideoComposer [Wang et al. 2023]
and trajectory in DragNUWA [Yin et al. 2023a]. The lack of clear
distinction between these two motions prevents these approaches
from achieving fine-grained and diverse motion control in video
generation.
In this paper, we introduce MotionCtrl, a unified and flexible
motion controller for video generation, designed to independently
control camera and object motion with a unified model. This ap-
proach enables fine-grained motion control in video generation and
facilitates flexible and diverse combinations of both motion types.
However, constructing such a unified motion controller presents
significant challenges due to the following two factors. First, cam-
era and object motions differ significantly in terms of movement
range and pattern. Camera motion refers to the global transfor-
mation of the whole scene across the temporal dimension, which
is typically represented through a sequence of camera poses over
time. In contrast, object motion involves the temporal movement of
specific objects within the scene, and it is usually represented as the
trajectory of a cluster of pixels associated with the objects. Second,
no existing dataset encompasses video clips that are accompanied
by a complete set of annotations, including captions, camera poses,
and object movement trajectories. Creating such a comprehensive
dataset requires a significant amount of effort and resources.
To address the aforementioned challenges, MotionCtrl deploys
a delicately designed architecture, training strategy, and curated
datasets. MotionCtrl consists of two modules: the Camera Motion
Control Module (CMCM) and the Object Motion Control Module
(OMCM), each tailored to handle camera motion and object mo-
tion characteristics, respectively. Both CMCM and OMCM function
as adapter-like modules integrated into existing video generation
models. Specifically, CMCM temporally integrates a sequence of
camera poses into the video generation model through its temporal
transformers, aligning the global motion of the generated video
with the provided camera poses. On the other hand, OMCM spa-
tially incorporates information regarding object movement into
the convolutional layers of the video generation model, indicating
the spatial positioning of objects in each generated frame. Noted
that in this study, we utilize VideoCrafter1 [Chen et al. 2023b],
an enhanced version of LVDM [He et al. 2022], as the underlying
video generation model, which we refer to as LVDM throughout
this paper.
Leveraging the delicately designed architecture reliant on a large-
scale pre-trained video diffusion model equipped with adapter-
like CMCM and OMCM, we can train these modules separately,
thereby mitigating the need for a comprehensive dataset contain-
ing videos with annotations of captions, camera poses, and object
movement trajectories. Consequently, we achieve MotionCtrl with


── PAGE 4 ──
MotionCtrl: A Unified and Flexible Motion Controller for Video Generation
SIGGRAPH Conference Papers ’24, July 27–August 01, 2024, Denver, CO, USA
two datasets: one contains annotations of captions and camera
poses, and another comprises annotations of captions and object
movement trajectories. Specifically, we introduce the augmented-
Realestate10k dataset, originally annotated with camera movement
information. We further enhance this dataset by generating cap-
tions using Blip2 [Li et al. 2023], rendering it suitable for training
camera motion control in video generation. Additionally, we aug-
ment videos sourced from WebVid [Bain et al. 2021] with object
movement trajectories synthesized using the motion segmentation
algorithm proposed in ParticleSfM [Zhao et al. 2022]. Alongside
their original annotated captions, the augmented-WebVid dataset
becomes conducive to learning object motion control in video
generation. By sequentially and respectively training CMCM and
OMCM with these two annotated datasets, our MotionCtrl frame-
work achieves the capability to independently or jointly control
camera and object motion within a unified video generation model.
This approach enables relatively fine-grained and flexible motion
control, empowering users with enhanced control over the gener-
ated videos.
Through these delicate designs, MotionCtrl demonstrates supe-
riority over previous methods in three aspects: 1) It independently
controls camera and object motion, enabling fine-grained adjust-
ments and a variety of motion combinations, as shown in Fig. 1. 2)
It uses camera poses and trajectories for motion conditions, which
do not affect the visual appearance, maintaining the objects’ natural
look in videos. For instance, our MotionCtrl generates a video with
a camera motion that closely reflects the reference video, offering
a realistic Eiffel Tower, as seen in Fig. 4 (b). In contrast, Video-
Composer [Wang et al. 2023] relies on dense motion vectors and
mistakenly captures a door’s shape of the reference video, resulting
in an unnatural Eiffel Tower. 3) MotionCtrl can control a variety
of camera movements and trajectories, without the need for fine-
tuning each individual camera or object motion.
The main contributions of this work can be summarized as fol-
lows: (1) We introduce MotionCtrl, a unified and flexible motion
controller for video generation, designed to independently or jointly
control camera motion and object motion in generated videos,
achieving more fine-grained and diverse motion control. (2) We
carefully tailor the architecture and training strategy of MotionCtrl
according to the inherent properties of camera motion, object mo-
tion, and imperfect training data, effectively achieving fine-grained
motion control in video generation. (3) We conduct extensive exper-
iments to demonstrate the superiority of MotionCtrl over previous
related methods, both qualitatively and quantitatively.
2
RELATED WORKS
Early research in video generation primarily relied on Genera-
tive Adversarial Networks (GANs) or Variational Autoencoders
(VAEs) [Saito et al. 2017; Skorokhodov et al. 2022; Tulyakov et al.
2018; Vondrick et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2019,?]. However, in recent
years, with the remarkable capacity demonstrated by diffusion mod-
els [Ho et al. 2020; Rombach et al. 2022; Saharia et al. 2022] in image
generation, video generation research has shifted towards utilizing
diffusion models. By further incorporating with text [Blattmann
et al. 2023b; Chen et al. 2023b; Guo et al. 2023; He et al. 2022; Ho
et al. 2022; Singer et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2023; Zhou et al. 2022]
or image [Blattmann et al. 2023a; Yin et al. 2023b] guidance, dif-
fusion model can generate high-fidelity videos with specific con-
tents. Particularly, the deployment of diffusion models in latent
space [Blattmann et al. 2023b; He et al. 2022; Rombach et al. 2022]
has significantly enhanced the computational efficiency of video
generation, leading to a surge in downstream research centered
on diffusion models. MotionCtrl, for instance, aims to leverage
diffusion models for controlling motion in generated videos.
In the areas of motion control of generated videos, many exist-
ing approaches learn motion by referencing specific or a series of
template videos[Guo et al. 2023; Wu et al. 2023b,a; Zhao et al. 2023].
While effective at a specific motion control, these methods typically
require training a new model for different templates, which can
be limiting. Some efforts aim to achieve more generalized motion
control [Chen et al. 2023a; Wang et al. 2023; Yin et al. 2023a]. For
instance, VideoComposer [Wang et al. 2023] introduces motion con-
trol via extra provided motion vectors, and DragNUWA [Yin et al.
2023a] suggests video generation conditioned on an initial image,
provided trajectories, and text prompts. However, the motion con-
trol in these methods is relatively broad and fails to fine-grainedly
disentangle the camera and object motion within videos.
Different from these works, we propose MotionCtrl, a unified
and flexible motion controller that can use either the camera poses
and object trajectories or combine these two kinds of guidance
to control the motion of generated videos. It enables a more fine-
grained and flexible control for video generation.
3
METHODOLOGY
3.1
Preliminary
The Latent Video Diffusion Model (LVDM) [He et al. 2022] aims to
generate high-quality and diverse videos guided by text prompts.
It employs a denoising diffusion model (U-Net [Ronneberger et al.
2015]) in the latent space for space and time efficiency. Conse-
quently, it constructs a lightweight 3D autoencoder, comprising an
encoder E and a decoder D, to encode raw videos into the latent
space and reconstruct the denoised latent features back into videos,
respectively. Its denoising U-Net (denoted as 𝜖𝜃) is constructed with
a sequence of blocks that consist of convolutional layers, spatial
transformers, and temporal transformers (shown in Fig. 2). It is
optimized using a noise-prediction loss:
L = E𝑧0,𝑐,𝜖∼N(0,I ),𝑡

∥𝜖−𝜖𝜃(𝑧𝑡,𝑡,𝑐)∥2
2

,
(1)
where 𝑐represents the text prompt, 𝑧0 is the latent code obtained
using E, 𝑡(𝑡∈[0,𝑇]) denotes the time step, and 𝑧𝑡is the noisy
latent features acquired by weighted addition of Gaussian noise 𝜖
to 𝑧0 using the following formula:
𝑧𝑡= √¯𝛼𝑡𝑧0 + √1 −¯𝛼𝑡𝜖, ¯𝛼𝑡=
𝑡Ö
𝑖=1
𝛼𝑡,
(2)
where 𝛼𝑡is used for scheduling the noise strength based on time
step 𝑡.
3.2
MotionCtrl
Fig. 2 illustrates the framework of MotionCtrl. To achieve disen-
tanglement between camera motion and object motion, and enable


── PAGE 5 ──
SIGGRAPH Conference Papers ’24, July 27–August 01, 2024, Denver, CO, USA
Z. Wang, Z. Yuan, X. Wang, Y. Li, T. Chen, M. Xia, P. Luo, and Y. Shan
（a）
（b）
···
···
CLIP
𝑅𝑇= {𝑅𝑇0, 𝑅𝑇1,…, 𝑅𝑇𝐿−1}
Prompt: A man rises a 
horse in Mars.
z𝑇
𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑗𝑠
···
···
···
···
OMCM
𝑦𝑡: [𝐵, 𝐿, 𝐻, 𝑊, 𝐶]
𝑅𝑇: [𝐵, 𝐿,12]
[𝐵× 𝐻× 𝑊, 𝐿, 12]
[𝐵× 𝐻× 𝑊, 𝐿, 𝐶]
[𝐵× 𝐻× 𝑊, 𝐿,𝐶+ 12]
FC
Attn2
Reshape
Repeat
[𝐵× 𝐻× 𝑊, 𝐿, 𝐶]
Concat
CMCM
Conv Layers
Spatial Transformer
Temporal Transformer
Trainable
Sum
Camera
CMCM
Conv Layers
Camera 
Pose
Denoising U-Net
Figure 2: MotionCtrl Framework. MotionCtrl extends the Denoising U-Net structure of LVDM with a Camera Motion Control
Module (CMCM) and an Object Motion Control Module (OMCM). As illustrated in (b), the CMCM integrates camera pose
sequences 𝑅𝑇with LVDM’s temporal transformers by appending 𝑅𝑇to the input of the second self-attention module and
applying a tailored and lightweight fully connected layer to extract the camera pose feature for subsequent processing.
The OMCM utilizes convolutional layers and downsamplings to derive multi-scale features from 𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑗𝑠, which are spatially
incorporated into LVDM’s convolutional layers to direct object motion. Further given a text prompt, LVDM generates videos
from noise that correspond to the prompt, with background and object movements reflecting the specified camera poses and
trajectories. The resulting video demonstrates the horse moving along its trajectory and meanwhile, the background moves
left, consistent with the camera’s rightward motion.
independent control of these two types of motion, MotionCtrl com-
prises two main components: a Camera Motion Control Module
(CMCM) and an Object Motion Control Module (OMCM). Tak-
ing into account the global property of camera motion and the
local property of object motion, CMCM interacts with the temporal
transformers in LVDM, while OMCM spatially cooperates with the
convolutional layers in LVDM. Furthermore, we employ multiple
training steps to adapt MotionCtrl to the absence of training data
that contains high-quality video clips accompanied by captions,
camera poses, and object movement trajectories. In the following
subsections, we will provide a detailed description of CMCM and
OMCM along with their corresponding training datasets and train-
ing strategies.
3.2.1
Camera Motion Control Module (CMCM). The CMCM is
a lightweight module constructed with several fully connected
layers. Since the camera motions are global transformations be-
tween frames in a video, CMCM cooperates with LVDM [He et al.
2022] via its temporal transformers. Typically, the temporal trans-
formers in LVDM comprise two self-attention modules and facili-
tate temporal information fusion between video frames. To mini-
mize the impact on LVDM’s generative performance, CMCM only
involves the second self-attention module in the temporal trans-
formers. Specifically, CMCM takes a sequence of camera poses
𝑅𝑇= {𝑅𝑇0, 𝑅𝑇1, . . . , 𝑅𝑇𝐿−1} as input. In this paper, the camera pose
is represented by its 3×3 rotation matrix and 3×1 translation matrix.
Consequently, 𝑅𝑇∈R𝐿×12, where 𝐿denotes the length of the gener-
ated video. As depicted in Fig. 2 (b), 𝑅𝑇is extended to 𝐻×𝑊×𝐿×12
before being concatenated with the output of the first self-attention
module in the temporal transformer (𝑦𝑡∈R𝐻×𝑊×𝐿×𝐶) along the
last dimension, where 𝐻and 𝑊represent the latent spatial size
of the generated video, and 𝐶is the number of channels in 𝑦𝑡.
The concatenated results are then projected back to the size of
𝐻×𝑊× 𝐿× 𝐶using a fully connected layer before being fed into
the second self-attention module in the temporal transformer.
3.2.2
Object Motion Control Module (OMCM). As depicted in Fig. 2,
MotionCtrl controls the object motion of the generated video us-
ing trajectories (𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑗𝑠). Typically, a trajectory is represented as a
sequence of spatial positions {(𝑥0,𝑦0), (𝑥1,𝑦1), . . . , (𝑥𝐿−1,𝑦𝐿−1)},
where (𝑥𝑖,𝑦𝑖),𝑖∈[0, 𝐿−1] indicates that the trajectory passes
through the 𝑖𝑡ℎframe at the spatial position (𝑥,𝑦). Particularly,
𝑥∈[0, ˆ𝑊) and 𝑦∈[0, ˆ𝐻), where ˆ𝐻and ˆ𝑊are the height and
width of 𝑧𝑇, respectively. To explicitly expose the moving speed of
the object, we represent 𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑗𝑠as
{(0, 0), (𝑢(𝑥1,𝑦1), 𝑣(𝑥1,𝑦1)), . . . , (𝑢(𝑥𝐿−1,𝑦𝐿−1), 𝑣(𝑥𝐿−1,𝑦𝐿−1))}, where
𝑢(𝑥𝑖,𝑦𝑖) = 𝑥𝑖−𝑥𝑖−1;𝑣(𝑥𝑖,𝑦𝑖) = 𝑦𝑖−𝑦𝑖−1; 0 < 𝑖< 𝐿.
(3)
Denoted that the first frame and the other spatial positions in the
subsequent frames that the trajectories do not pass are described
as (0, 0). Finally, 𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑗𝑠∈R𝐿× ˆ𝐻× ˆ
𝑊×2.
𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑗𝑠is injected into LVDM with OMCM, which is highlighted in
the purple block of Fig. 2. OMCM consists of multiple convolutional


── PAGE 6 ──
MotionCtrl: A Unified and Flexible Motion Controller for Video Generation
SIGGRAPH Conference Papers ’24, July 27–August 01, 2024, Denver, CO, USA
layers combined with downsampling operations. It extracts multi-
scale features from the 𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑗𝑠and correspondingly adds them to
the input of the LVDM’s convolutional layers. Drawing inspiration
from T2I-Adapter [Mou et al. 2024], the trajectories are only applied
to the encoder of the Denoising U-Net to balance the quanlity of
the generated video with the ability of object motion control.
3.2.3
Training Strategy and Data Construction. To achieve the con-
trol of camera and object motion while generating a video via text
prompts, video clips in a training dataset must contain annota-
tions of captions, camera poses, and object movement trajectories.
However, a dataset with such comprehensive details is currently
unavailable, and assembling one would require considerable effort
and resources. To address this challenge, we introduce a multi-step
training strategy and train our proposed camera motion control
module (CMCM) and object motion control module (OMCM) with
distinct augmented datasets tailored to their specific motion control
requirements.
Learning the camera motion control module (CMCM). CMCM only
requires a training dataset that contains video clips with annota-
tions of captions and camera poses. Considering that Realestate10K
[Zhou et al. 2018] contains over 60k videos with relatively clean
annotations of camera poses, we take it as our training dataset of
CMCM. However, employing Realestate10K in MotionCtrl presents
two potential challenges: 1) The diversity of scenes is limited in
Realestate10K, primarily from real estate videos, potentially com-
promising the quality of the generated video; and 2) it lacks captions
needed for T2V models.
Regarding the first challenge, we adopt an adapter-like control
module (CMCM), with only several new added MLP layers and
the second self-attention module of the temporal transformers in
LVDM are trainable, and reserving the generation quality of LVDM
by freezing most of its parameters. Since the temporal transformers
are mainly focus on the learning of global motions, the limited scene
diverisity of Realestate10K seldom affects the generation quality
of LVDM. This is substantiated by quantitative results presented
in Table 2, where the FID [Seitzer 2020] and FVD [Unterthiner
et al. 2018] metrics indicate that the video quality generated by our
MotionCtrl is on par with the LVDM outcomes.
To address the second challenge, we adopt Blip2 [Li et al. 2023],
an image captioning algorithm, to generate captions for each video
clip in Realestate10K. Details are in the supplementary materials.
Learning the object motion control module (OMCM). OMCM re-
quires a dataset comprising video clips with captions and object
movement trajectories, which is currently lacking in the commu-
nity. To meet the requirement, we utilize ParticleSfM [Zhao et al.
2022] to synthesize object movement trajectories in WebVid [Bain
et al. 2021]. WebVid a large-scale video dataset equipped with cap-
tions and commonly used in the T2V generation task. Although
ParticleSfM is a structure-from-motion system primarily, it incor-
porates a trajectory-based motion segmentation module utilized
for filtering out dynamic trajectories that affect the production of
camera trajectories in a dynamic scene. The dynamic trajectories
attained by the motion segmentation module exactly fulfill the
requirements of our MotionCtrl and we employ this module to
synthesize moving object trajectories for about 243,000 videos in
Extract object
movement trajectories
Randomly select
Gaussian Filter
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3: Trajectories for Object Motion Control. Parti-
cleSfM [Zhao et al. 2022] is employed to extract object move-
ment trajectories from video clips, effectively disentangling
object motion from camera-induced movement. To circum-
vent the issues of dense trajectories, which can encode object
shapes and are challenging to design at inference, we train
the OMCM using sparse trajectories sampled from the dense
ones. These sparse trajectories, being too scattered for effec-
tive learning, are subsequently refined with a Gaussian filter.
WebVid. An example is illustrated in Fig. 3 (b), where the trajec-
tories predominantly correspond to a moving person. Synthesis
details are in the supplementary.
To circumvent the necessity for users to provide dense trajecto-
ries as depicted in Fig. 3 (b), which may not be user-friendly, Mo-
tionCtrl is required to control the moving objects based on sparse
(one or a few) trajectories provided by users. Consequently, our
OMCM is trained with 𝑛∈[1, 𝑁] trajectories (where 𝑁represents
the maximum number of trajectories for each video) randomly se-
lected from the synthesized dense trajectories (as shown in Fig. 3
(c)). Nevertheless, these selected sparse trajectories tend to be too
scattered for effective training. Drawing inspiration from Drag-
NUWA [Yin et al. 2023a], we mitigate this issue by applying a
Gaussian filter to the sparse trajectories (Fig. 3 (d)) and we initially
train the OMCM using dense trajectories before fine-tune it using
sparse trajectories.
In this training phase, both LVDM and CMCM are well-trained
and frozen, with only the OMCM is trained. This strategy guaran-
tees that OMCM adds the object motion control capabilities with
a limited dataset while minimally impacting LVDM and CMCM.
Upon the completion of this training phase, giving both camera
poses and object trajectories allows for flexible controlling the cam-
era and object motion in the generated video.
4
EXPERIMENTS
4.1
Experiment Settings
4.1.1
Implementation Details. MotionCtrl is built upon the LVDM
framework [He et al. 2022]/VideoCraft1 [Chen et al. 2023b], which
is trained on 16-frame sequences at a resolution of 256 × 256. It can
be readily adapted to other video generation models with similar
structures, such as AnimateDiff [Guo et al. 2023], adhering to the
settings specific to each model. Additionally, the maximum number
of trajectories 𝑁is fixed at 8. Both CMCM and OMCM are optimized
using the Adam optimizer [Kingma and Ba 2014] with a batch size
of 128 and a learning rate of 1𝑒−4 across 8 NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPUs.
The CMCM typically requires approximately 50,000 iterations to
converge. Meanwhile, OMCM undergoes an initial training phase


── PAGE 7 ──
SIGGRAPH Conference Papers ’24, July 27–August 01, 2024, Denver, CO, USA
Z. Wang, Z. Yuan, X. Wang, Y. Li, T. Chen, M. Xia, P. Luo, and Y. Shan
Prompt: Rocky coastline with crashing waves.
Camera Poses
AnimateDiff
MotionCtrl
1x Speed
MotionCtrl
2x Speed
Frame 0
Frame 3
Frame 6
Frame 9
Frame 12
Frame 15
MotionCtrl
0.2x Speed
Zoom In
Camera Poses
Realestate10K
Video
VideoComposer
MotionCtrl
Frame 0
Frame 3
Frame 6
Frame 9
Frame 12
Frame 15
Prompt: Effiel Tower in Paris.
Motion Vectors
Frame 12
(a) Camera motion control on basic poses
(b) Camera motion control on relatively complex poses
Figure 4: Qualitative Comparisons on Camera Motion Control. (a) Basic Poses: MotionCtrl and AnimateDiff[Guo et al. 2023]
effectively execute zooms, but MotionCtrl can adjust to varying camera moving speeds. (b) Relatively Complex Poses: Video-
Composer[Wang et al. 2023] uses Realestate10K’s raw video for motion vectors, capturing unintended shapes like doors, leading
to unnatural results (refer to frame 12). MotionCtrl, however, produces a relatively natural video with motion that closely
matches the camera poses.
on dense trajectories for 20,000 iterations, followed by fine-tuning
with sparse trajectories for an additional 20,000 iterations.
4.1.2
Evaluation Datasets. (1) Camera motion control evaluation
dataset encompasses two types of camera poses: basic camera poses
(pan left, pan right, pan up, pan down, zoom in, zoom out, anti-
clockwise rotation, and clockwise rotation) and relatively complex
camera poses1 obtained from the test set of Realestate10K [Zhou
et al. 2018] or synthesized using ParticleSfM [Zhao et al. 2022] on
videos from WebVid [Bain et al. 2021] and HD-VILA [Xue et al. 2022].
(2) Object motion control evaluation dataset consists of 283 samples
constructed with diverse handcrafted trajectories and prompts. Fur-
ther details regarding the construction of the evaluation datasets
are provided in the supplementary materials.
4.1.3
Evaluation Metrics. (1) The quality of the generated videos
is evaluated using Fréchet Inception Distance (FID)[Seitzer 2020],
Fréchet Video Distance (FVD)[Unterthiner et al. 2018], and CLIP
Similarity (CLIPSIM) [Radford et al. 2021], which measure the vi-
sual quality, temporal coherence, and semantic similarity to the text,
respectively. Denoted that the reference videos of FID and FVD are
1000 videos from WebVid [Bain et al. 2021]. (2) The efficacy of the
camera and object motion control is quantified by computing the
Euclidean distance between the predicted and ground truth camera
poses and object trajectories, respectively. The camera poses and
object trajectories of the predicted videos are extracted using Parti-
cleSfM [Zhao et al. 2022]. We title these two metrics as CamMC
and ObjMC, respectively. 3) We also conduct a user study for sub-
jective quantitative evaluation, the details of which are provided in
the supplementary materials due to space limitations.
4.2
Comparisons with State-of-the-Art Methods
To validate the effectiveness of our MotionCtrl in controlling both
camera and object motion, we compare it with two leading methods:
AnimateDiff [Guo et al. 2023] and VideoComposer [Wang et al.
1"Complex camera poses" in this work denotes camera movement beyond the basic
camera poses. While basic camera poses involve movement in a single straight direction,
complex camera poses contain movement in several directions.
2023]. AnimateDiff employs 8 separate LoRA [Hu et al. 2021] models
to control 8 basic camera motions in videos, such as panning and
zooming, while VideoComposer manipulates video motion using
motion vectors without differentiating between camera and object
movements. Although DragNUWA [Yin et al. 2023a] is relevant to
our research, its code is not publicly available, precluding a direct
comparison. Moreover, DragNUWA only learns motion control
with the trajectories extracted from optical flow, which cannot fine-
grainedly distinguish the movement between foreground objects
and background, limiting its ability to precisely control camera and
object motion.
We compare our MotionCtrl with these methods in terms of
camera motion and object motion control, and show the capability
of our MotionCtrl to flexibly combine the control of camera motion
and object motion in video generation. More comparisons and video
comparisons are provided in the supplementary materials.
4.2.1
Camera Motion Control. We assess camera motion control us-
ing basic poses and relatively complex poses. AnimateDiff [Guo et al.
2023] is limited to basic camera poses, while VideoComposer [Wang
et al. 2023] handles complex poses by extracting motion vectors
from provided videos. The qualitative results are shown in Fig. 4.
For basic poses, both MotionCtrl and AnimateDiff can produce
videos with forward camera movement, but MotionCtrl can gen-
erate camera motion with varying speeds, while AnimateDiff is
nonadjustable. Regarding complex poses, where the camera first
moves left front and then forward, VideoComposer can mimic the
reference video’s camera motion using extracted motion vectors.
However, the dense motion vectors inadvertently capture object
shapes, the door’s outline in the reference video (frame 12), result-
ing in an unnatural-looking Eiffel Tower. MotionCtrl, guided by
rotation and translation matrices, generates more natural-looking
videos with camera motion close to the reference.
Quantitative results in Table 1 show MotionCtrl’s superiority
over AnimateDiff and VideoComposer for both basic and relatively
complex poses, as reflected by the CamMC score. Additionally,


── PAGE 8 ──
MotionCtrl: A Unified and Flexible Motion Controller for Video Generation
SIGGRAPH Conference Papers ’24, July 27–August 01, 2024, Denver, CO, USA
Trajectory
MotionCtrl
VideoComposer
Prompt: A girl is skiing.
Figure 5: Qualitative Comparisons on Object Motion Control. Both VideoComposer and MotionCtrl can generate an object
moving along a given trajectory (red curve), but MotionCtrl more precisely follows it in each frame, as indicated by green
points.
Table 1: Quantitative Comparisons with AnimateDiff [Guo
et al. 2023] and VideoComposer [Wang et al. 2023]. Our Mo-
tionCtrl outperforms competing approaches in both camera
and object motion control while also excelling at preserving
text similarity and the quality of the video generation.
Method
AnimateDiff
VideoComposer
MotionCtrl
CamMC ↓(Basic Poses)
0.0548
-
0.0289
CamMC ↓(Complex Poses)
-
0.0950
0.0735
ObjMC ↓
-
36.8351
28.877
CLIPSIM ↑
0.2144
0.2214
0.2319
FID ↓
157.73
130.97
124.09
FVD ↓
1815.88
1004.99
852.15
MotionCtrl achieves better text similarity and quality metrics, as
measured by CLIPSIM, FID, and FVD.
4.2.2
Object Motion Control. We compare our MotionCtrl with
VideoComposer for object motion control, where VideoComposer
utilizes motion vectors extracted from trajectories. The qualitative
results are shown in Fig. 5. The red curve illustrates the given trajec-
tory, while the green points indicate the expected object locations
in the corresponding frame. The visual comparison reveals that
MotionCtrl can generate objects whose movements are closer to
the given trajectories, whereas VideoComposer’s results deviate in
certain frames, highlighting MotionCtrl’s superior object motion
control capability. The quantitative results in terms of ObjMC in
Table 1 also demonstrate that MotionCtrl achieves better object
motion control than VideoComposer.
4.2.3
Combination of Camera Motion and Object Motion. MotionC-
trl can not only control camera and object motion independently
within a single video but also perform integrated control of both.
As demonstrated in Fig. 1 (b) and (c), when MotionCtrl is applied
with only a trajectory, it primarily generates a swaying rose that
follows this path. By further introducing zoom-out camera poses,
both the rose and the background are animated in accordance with
the specified trajectory and camera movements.
More results of MotionCtrl can be found in Fig. 8, supplementary
materials, and the demo video.
4.3
Ablation Studies
4.3.1
Integrated Position of Camera Motion Control Module (CMCM)..
We test implementing camera motion control by combining camera
Table 2: Ablation of Camera Motion Control. Our Camera
Motion Control Module (CMCM), incorporated with the tem-
poral transformers of LVDM [He et al. 2022], effectively con-
trols camera motion and maintains LVDM’s video quality.
Method
CamMC ↓
CLIPSIM ↑
FID ↓
FVD ↓
LVDM [He et al. 2022]
0.9010
0.2359
130.62
1007.63
Time Embedding
0.0887
0.2361
132.74
1461.36
Spatial Cross-Attention
0.0857
0.2357
153.86
1306.78
Spatial Self-Attention
0.0902
0.2384
146.37
1303.58
Temporal Transformer
0.0289
0.2355
132.36
1005.24
poses with the time embedding, spatial cross-attention, or spatial
self-attention module in LVDM. Although such methods have suc-
ceeded in other types of controlling [Mou et al. 2024; Zhang et al.
2023], such as sketch and depth, they fail to endow camera control
capabilities to LVDM, as evidenced by the CamMC scores in Table 2
and visualized results in Fig. 6. Their CamMC scores are close to the
original LVDM. That is because these components primarily focus
on spatial content generation, which is insensitive to the camera
motion encoded in camera poses. Conversely, incorporating CMCM
with LVDM’s temporal transformers significantly improves camera
motion control, as indicated by a lower CamMC score of 0.0289 in
Table 2. Camera motion primarily causes global view transforma-
tions over time, and fusing camera poses into LVDM’s temporal
blocks aligns with this property, enabling effective camera motion
control during video generation.
4.3.2
Dense Trajectories v.s. Sparse Trajectories. OMCM is initially
trained with dense object movement trajectories extracted via Parti-
cleSfM [Zhao et al. 2022] and then fine-tune with sparse trajectories.
We evaluate the effectiveness of this approach by comparing it with
training OMCM solely on dense or sparse trajectories. Table 3 and
Fig. 7 indicate that training exclusively with dense trajectories yields
inferior outcomes, which is attributed to discrepancies between
the training and inference phases (sparse trajectories are provided
during inference). Though training solely with sparse trajectories
shows improvement over the dense-only approach, it still falls short
of the hybrid method, since sparse trajectories alone provide limited
information. In contrast, dense trajectories offer richer information
that accelerates learning, and subsequent fine-tuning with sparse


── PAGE 9 ──
SIGGRAPH Conference Papers ’24, July 27–August 01, 2024, Denver, CO, USA
Z. Wang, Z. Yuan, X. Wang, Y. Li, T. Chen, M. Xia, P. Luo, and Y. Shan
Table 3: Ablation of Object Motion Control. The Object Mo-
tion Control Module (OMCM), when initially trained on
dense object movement trajectories and subsequently fine-
tuned with sparse trajectories, outperforms versions trained
exclusively on either dense or sparse trajectories.
Method
ObjMC ↓
CLIPSIM ↑
FID ↓
FVD ↓
Dense
54.4114
0.2352
175.8622
2227.87
Sparse
34.6937
0.2365
158.5553
2385.39
Dense + Sparse
25.1198
0.2342
149.2754
2001.57
trajectories allows OMCM to adjust to the sparsity encountered
during inference.
4.3.3
Training Strategy. Given the limitations of the available train-
ing dataset, we propose a multi-step training strategy for MotionC-
trl, starting with the CMCM using Realestate10K [Zhou et al. 2018],
followed by the OMCM with synthesized object movement trajecto-
ries. To thoroughly assess our approach, we experiment with revers-
ing the order and training OMCM before CMCM. This sequence
does not impact camera motion control, as OMCM components
do not participate in CMCM training. However, it leads to a de-
crease in object motion control performance since the subsequent
training of CMCM adjusts parts of LVDM’s temporal transformers,
disrupting the object motion control adaptation achieved during
OMCM’s initial training. Thus, our multi-step strategy, though a
compromise due to dataset constraints, is deliberately structured
to train CMCM before OMCM, ensuring enhanced performance in
both camera and object motion control.
4.4
Deploy MotionCtrl on AnimateDiff
We also deploy our MotionCtrl on AnimateDiff [Guo et al. 2023].
Therefore, we can control the motion of the video generated with
our adjusted AnimateDiff cooperating with various LoRA [Hu et al.
2021] models in the committee. Visualized results of complex cam-
era motion control and object motion control are in Fig. 9 and
Fig. 10. More results are in the supplementary materials.
5
LIMITATIONS
As an initial exploration into controlling camera and object motion
within a unified video generation model, MotionCtrl has demon-
strated promising and insightful results. However, controlling the
camera and object motion in the same video with both complex
camera and complex object trajectories requires a careful design
of these trajectories to achieve a natural and harmonious outcome,
and the success rate is relatively low. Further research is needed
to enhance the accuracy of simultaneously controlling camera and
object motion in generated videos.
6
CONCLUSION
This paper proposes MotionCtrl, a unified and flexible controller
that can independently or combinably control the camera and ob-
ject motion in a video attained with a video generation model.
To achieve this end, MotionCtrl carefully tailors a camera motion
control module and object motion control module to adapt to the
specific properties of camera motion and object motion and de-
ploys a multi-step training strategy to train these two modules
with delicately augmented datasets. Comprehensive experiments,
including qualitative and quantitative evaluations, showcase the
superiority of our proposed MotionCtrl in both camera and object
motion control.
REFERENCES
[n. d.]. https://www.pika.art/.
Max Bain, Arsha Nagrani, Gül Varol, and Andrew Zisserman. 2021. Frozen in time: A
joint video and image encoder for end-to-end retrieval. In ICCV.
Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Sumith Kulal, Daniel Mendelevitch, Maciej Kilian,
Dominik Lorenz, Yam Levi, Zion English, Vikram Voleti, Adam Letts, et al. 2023a.
Stable video diffusion: Scaling latent video diffusion models to large datasets. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2311.15127 (2023).
Andreas Blattmann, Robin Rombach, Huan Ling, Tim Dockhorn, Seung Wook Kim,
Sanja Fidler, and Karsten Kreis. 2023b. Align your latents: High-resolution video
synthesis with latent diffusion models. In CVPR.
Haoxin Chen, Menghan Xia, Yingqing He, Yong Zhang, Xiaodong Cun, Shaoshu Yang,
Jinbo Xing, Yaofang Liu, Qifeng Chen, Xintao Wang, et al. 2023b. Videocrafter1:
Open diffusion models for high-quality video generation.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.19512 (2023).
Tsai-Shien Chen, Chieh Hubert Lin, Hung-Yu Tseng, Tsung-Yi Lin, and Ming-Hsuan
Yang. 2023a. Motion-conditioned diffusion model for controllable video synthesis.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.14404 (2023).
Ming Ding, Zhuoyi Yang, Wenyi Hong, Wendi Zheng, Chang Zhou, Da Yin, Junyang
Lin, Xu Zou, Zhou Shao, Hongxia Yang, et al. 2021. Cogview: Mastering text-to-
image generation via transformers. NeurIPS (2021).
Patrick Esser, Johnathan Chiu, Parmida Atighehchian, Jonathan Granskog, and Anasta-
sis Germanidis. 2023. Structure and content-guided video synthesis with diffusion
models. In ICCV.
Yuwei Guo, Ceyuan Yang, Anyi Rao, Yaohui Wang, Yu Qiao, Dahua Lin, and Bo Dai.
2023. AnimateDiff: Animate Your Personalized Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
without Specific Tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.04725 (2023).
Yingqing He, Tianyu Yang, Yong Zhang, Ying Shan, and Qifeng Chen. 2022. Latent
video diffusion models for high-fidelity long video generation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2211.13221 (2022).
Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Chitwan Saharia, Jay Whang, Ruiqi Gao, Alexey Gritsenko,
Diederik P Kingma, Ben Poole, Mohammad Norouzi, David J Fleet, et al. 2022.
Imagen video: High definition video generation with diffusion models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2210.02303 (2022).
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. 2020. Denoising diffusion probabilistic
models. NeurIPS (2020).
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang,
Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. 2021. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09685 (2021).
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2014. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 (2014).
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. 2023. Blip-2: Bootstrapping
language-image pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models.
In ICML.
Chong Mou, Xintao Wang, Liangbin Xie, Yanze Wu, Jian Zhang, Zhongang Qi, and
Ying Shan. 2024. T2i-adapter: Learning adapters to dig out more controllable ability
for text-to-image diffusion models. In AAAI.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini
Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. 2021.
Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In ICML.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. 2022.
Hierarchical text-conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.06125 (2022).
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
Mark Chen, and Ilya Sutskever. 2021. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In ICML.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer.
2022. High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In CVPR.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. 2015. U-net: Convolutional
networks for biomedical image segmentation. In MICCAI.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton,
Kamyar Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans,
et al. 2022. Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language
understanding. NeuIPS (2022).
Masaki Saito, Eiichi Matsumoto, and Shunta Saito. 2017. Temporal generative adver-
sarial nets with singular value clipping. In ICCV.
Maximilian Seitzer. 2020. pytorch-fid: FID Score for PyTorch. https://github.com/
mseitzer/pytorch-fid.
Uriel Singer, Adam Polyak, Thomas Hayes, Xi Yin, Jie An, Songyang Zhang, Qiyuan
Hu, Harry Yang, Oron Ashual, Oran Gafni, et al. 2022. Make-a-video: Text-to-video
generation without text-video data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14792 (2022).


── PAGE 10 ──
MotionCtrl: A Unified and Flexible Motion Controller for Video Generation
SIGGRAPH Conference Papers ’24, July 27–August 01, 2024, Denver, CO, USA
Ivan Skorokhodov, Sergey Tulyakov, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. 2022. Stylegan-v: A
continuous video generator with the price, image quality and perks of stylegan2.
In CVPR.
Sergey Tulyakov, Ming-Yu Liu, Xiaodong Yang, and Jan Kautz. 2018. Mocogan: De-
composing motion and content for video generation. In CVPR.
Thomas Unterthiner, Sjoerd Van Steenkiste, Karol Kurach, Raphael Marinier, Marcin
Michalski, and Sylvain Gelly. 2018. Towards accurate generative models of video:
A new metric & challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.01717 (2018).
Carl Vondrick, Hamed Pirsiavash, and Antonio Torralba. 2016. Generating videos with
scene dynamics. NeuIPS (2016).
Ting-Chun Wang, Ming-Yu Liu, Andrew Tao, Guilin Liu, Jan Kautz, and Bryan Catan-
zaro. 2019. Few-shot video-to-video synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.12713
(2019).
Xiang Wang, Hangjie Yuan, Shiwei Zhang, Dayou Chen, Jiuniu Wang, Yingya Zhang,
Yujun Shen, Deli Zhao, and Jingren Zhou. 2023. VideoComposer: Compositional
Video Synthesis with Motion Controllability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.02018 (2023).
Jay Zhangjie Wu, Yixiao Ge, Xintao Wang, Stan Weixian Lei, Yuchao Gu, Yufei Shi,
Wynne Hsu, Ying Shan, Xiaohu Qie, and Mike Zheng Shou. 2023b. Tune-a-video:
One-shot tuning of image diffusion models for text-to-video generation. In ICCV.
Ruiqi Wu, Liangyu Chen, Tong Yang, Chunle Guo, Chongyi Li, and Xiangyu Zhang.
2023a. LAMP: Learn A Motion Pattern for Few-Shot-Based Video Generation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2310.10769 (2023).
Hongwei Xue, Tiankai Hang, Yanhong Zeng, Yuchong Sun, Bei Liu, Huan Yang, Jian-
long Fu, and Baining Guo. 2022. Advancing high-resolution video-language repre-
sentation with large-scale video transcriptions. In CVPR.
Shengming Yin, Chenfei Wu, Jian Liang, Jie Shi, Houqiang Li, Gong Ming, and Nan
Duan. 2023a. Dragnuwa: Fine-grained control in video generation by integrating
text, image, and trajectory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08089 (2023).
Shengming Yin, Chenfei Wu, Huan Yang, Jianfeng Wang, Xiaodong Wang, Minheng Ni,
Zhengyuan Yang, Linjie Li, Shuguang Liu, Fan Yang, et al. 2023b. Nuwa-xl: Diffusion
over diffusion for extremely long video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12346
(2023).
Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. 2023. Adding conditional control to
text-to-image diffusion models. In ICCV.
Rui Zhao, Yuchao Gu, Jay Zhangjie Wu, David Junhao Zhang, Jiawei Liu, Weijia Wu,
Jussi Keppo, and Mike Zheng Shou. 2023. MotionDirector: Motion Customization
of Text-to-Video Diffusion Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08465 (2023).
Wang Zhao, Shaohui Liu, Hengkai Guo, Wenping Wang, and Yong-Jin Liu. 2022.
Particlesfm: Exploiting dense point trajectories for localizing moving cameras in
the wild. In ECCV.
Daquan Zhou, Weimin Wang, Hanshu Yan, Weiwei Lv, Yizhe Zhu, and Jiashi Feng.
2022. Magicvideo: Efficient video generation with latent diffusion models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2211.11018 (2022).
Tinghui Zhou, Richard Tucker, John Flynn, Graham Fyffe, and Noah Snavely. 2018.
Stereo magnification: Learning view synthesis using multiplane images. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1805.09817 (2018).
Yufan Zhou, Ruiyi Zhang, Changyou Chen, Chunyuan Li, Chris Tensmeyer, Tong Yu,
Jiuxiang Gu, Jinhui Xu, and Tong Sun. 2021. Lafite: Towards language-free training
for text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.13792 (2021).


── PAGE 11 ──
SIGGRAPH Conference Papers ’24, July 27–August 01, 2024, Denver, CO, USA
Z. Wang, Z. Yuan, X. Wang, Y. Li, T. Chen, M. Xia, P. Luo, and Y. Shan
Time Embedding
LVDM
Spatial CrossAttn
Spatial SelfAttn
Temporal 
Transformer 
Prompt: A fish is swimming in the aquarium tank.
Figure 6: The qualitative results of ablation study regarding the integrated position of the Camera Motion Control Module
(CMCM) with LVDM [He et al. 2022]. Integrating CMCM of MotionCtrl with the temporal transformers in LVDM significantly
improves camera motion control compared to other setups.
Dense + Sparse
Sparse
Dense
Prompt: A man is surfing.
Figure 7: The qualitative results of ablation study "Dense Trajectories v.s. Sparse Trajectories". The model trained with dense
trajectories fails to control the object motion in the generated video. Conversely, the model trained on dense trajectories,
followed by fine-tuning on sparse trajectories, exhibits superior precision in object motion control compared to the model
trained solely on sparse trajectories.


── PAGE 12 ──
MotionCtrl: A Unified and Flexible Motion Controller for Video Generation
SIGGRAPH Conference Papers ’24, July 27–August 01, 2024, Denver, CO, USA
Prompt: A human robot standing on Mars.
Prompt: Two zebras.
Prompt: Seagull, rocks, storm, wind, waves.
Prompt: A basketball in the air.
Figure 8: More results of MotionCtrl include those controlled by camera poses or object trajectories independently, as well as
those controlled with camera poses and object trajectories simultaneously.
Prompt: A girl.
Figure 9: Results of complex camera motion control deployed on AnimateDiff [Guo et al. 2023]
Prompt: : A teddy bear skateboarding.
Figure 10: Results of object motion control deployed on AnimateDiff [Guo et al. 2023].
