# Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice
# Source: Webb - 2016 - Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice.pdf
# BibTeX key: webb_ekphrasis_2016
# Zotero dir: 3123
# Extracted chars: 204691
# Format: PDF
============================================================

── PAGE 1 ──
Contents
List of Tables
Abbreviations
Acknowledgements
Preface
Introduction
1. The Contexts of Ekphrasis
2. Learning Ekphrasis: The Progymnasmata
3. The Subjects of Ekphrasis
4. 
: Making Absent Things Present
Enargeia
5. 
: Memory, Imagination and the Gallery of the Mind
Phantasia
6. Ekphrasis and the Art of Persuasion
7. The Poetics of Ekphrasis: Fiction, Illusion and Meta-ekphrasis
Conclusion
Appendix A: Translations
Appendix B: Subjects for Ekphrasis
Bibliography
Index
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:03.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 6-6 | Printed page 1 of 1


── PAGE 2 ──
Introduction
‘A speech that brings the subject matter vividly before the eyes’
This is the definition of ekphrasis taught to students in the Greek schools of the Roman Empire as they 
began their studies of rhetoric. It is a very different definition from the one which has become familiar in 
modern literary criticism for, however ekphrasis is defined in modern critical discourse, it is usually seen 
as a text or textual fragment that engages with the visual arts. Over the last few decades, ekphrasis has 
been defined as ‘the poetic description of a pictorial or sculptural work of art’, ‘the verbal representation 
of visual representation’ or ‘words about an image’.
  For all their variety, these definitions place a 
    
1
central importance on a certain type of referent: the visual arts (a category which sometimes includes 
and sometimes excludes buildings and monuments). But this was not its ancient sense.
1 Leo 
, ‘The “Ode on a Grecian Urn”, or content vs. metagrammar’, in 
Spitzer
Essays on English and 
, ed. Anna Hatcher (Princeton, 1962); J.A.W. 
, 
 
American Literature
Heffernan Museum of Words
(Chicago, 1993), p. 3; Shadi 
 and Jaś Elsner, ‘Introduction: eight ways of looking at an 
Bartsch
ekphrasis’, 
, 102 (2007): i.
CP
This book is an exploration of the range of meaning of the term as it was used in antiquity. It is a 
positive attempt to understand and explain a set of ideas about language and its impact on the listener 
that are expressed in the rhetorical handbooks of the first centuries CE, when Greek rhetoric reached a 
height of sophistication under the Roman Empire. Ideally it ought to be possible to start straight away 
with this analysis, but the popularity of the modern definition of the term makes it necessary to include 
some preliminary remarks about what is and what is not included in this book and why.
What This Book Is Not About
This is not a book about word and image, in the sense of ‘words about pictures’. There was indisputably 
a strong tradition of describing real or imaginary works of art in oratory, historiography, epigram, epic 
and other poetry.
  But there is no evidence that these were considered to form a single genre, or that 
    
2
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:19.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 12-26 | Printed page 1 of 12


── PAGE 3 ──
that genre had a name, still less that that name would have been ‘ekphrasis’.
  Painting, sculpture and 
    
3
architecture certainly were among the subjects of ekphrasis as it was conceived and defined in antiquity: 
the 
 – the elementary exercises in rhetoric which contain the first definitions of 
Progymnasmata
ekphrasis – mention the Shield of Achilles in 
, 18 as an example and contain advice on describing 
Iliad
sculptures, paintings and buildings. Outside these elementary exercises, the Younger Philostratos refers 
to his grandfather’s 
 as ‘ekphraseis of works of graphic art’ and many descriptions of such 
Eikones
subjects seem clearly to fit the ancient definition by describing their subjects in such vivid detail that the 
reader does seem to ‘see’ them.
  Such subjects certainly 
 be evoked in ekphrasis, but they were 
    
4
could
not its defining feature.
2 See, in particular, Jaś 
, ‘The genres of Ekphrasis’, in Elsner (ed.), 
Elsner
The Verbal and the Visual: 
 = 
, 31 (2002): 1–18.
Cultures of Ekphrasis in Antiquity
Ramus
3 As Graham 
, ‘New light on the “ekphrastic epigram”’, 
, 143 (2003): 59–62 points out, the 
Zanker
ZPE
term ‘ekphrastic epigram’ is a modern coinage.
4 Philostratos the Younger, 
, 2.
Eikones, Proem
I have argued elsewhere that the existence of this intermediate category of ekphraseis (in the ancient 
sense) of works of art and architecture (like Philostratos’ 
 or Paul the Silentiary’s verse ekphrasis 
Eikones
of Hagia Sophia) provided part of the impetus towards the modern definition as scholars in the late 
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries focused attention on this particular group of texts which then 
came to stand for the whole category of ekphrasis.
  But at no point in antiquity (or Byzantium) was 
    
5
ekphrasis confined to a single category of subject matter, nor can every text about images be claimed as 
ekphrasis in the ancient sense. There are, for example, many epigrams about sculptures which do not 
seek to ‘bring the subject matter before the eyes’. The examples recently analyzed by Simon 
, 
Goldhill
for example, consider the act of viewing and meditate on naturalism, but their function as comments on 
the 
 of viewing is different from the central function of ekphrasis: making the listener ‘see’ the 
act
subject in their mind’s eye.
  An ekphrasis may itself constitute a commentary on the act of viewing, but 
    
6
this common feature is not central to the definition of ekphrasis that interests me here. So, the epigrams, 
like certain passages of Pliny or Pausanias, while very relevant to understanding constructions of 
viewing in antiquity, are at most only tangentially relevant to the rhetorical practices that are the subject 
of this book. For that reason they are not included.
5 See Ruth Webb, ‘Ekphrasis ancient and modern: the invention of a genre’, 
, 15: 7–18.
Word and Image
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:19.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 12-26 | Printed page 2 of 12


── PAGE 4 ──
6 Simon Goldhill, ‘The naïve and knowing eye: ecphrasis and the culture of viewing in the Hellenistic 
world’, in Simon Goldhill and Robin Osborne (eds), 
 (Cambridge: 
Art and Text in Ancient Greek Culture
Cambridge University Press, 1994), pp. 197–223; ‘What is ekphrasis for?’, 
, 102 (2007): 16–19.
CP
This study focuses on the rhetorical theory and practice of ekphrasis for the simple reason that it is in the 
rhetoricians’ schools that ekphrasis was defined, taught and practised and it is therefore in the domain of 
rhetoric that we can find a substantial explanation of what ekphrasis was, how it functioned and what its 
purpose was. This rhetorical technique of ekphrasis can also be found in poetry, of course, but to study 
poetic examples in detail would require a separate book.
Many of the poetic descriptions of works of art – the Shield of Achilles, the Hesiodic 
, 
Shield of Herakles
Moschos’ 
, Catullus 64, Virgil’s 
 – do fulfil the basic requirement of ‘placing 
Europa
Shield of Aeneas
before the eyes’ and seem to rival the visual arts, as ekphrasis should. It would therefore have been 
possible to append a chapter to this book examining these usual suspects from the perspective of 
rhetorical ekphrasis. But there are many reasons why I decided against this. Firstly, these passages have 
already been abundantly and fruitfully analyzed by others and I would have very little to add to the 
existing studies.
  Secondly, the inclusion of a chapter devoted to one type of subject matter would have 
    
7
created a serious imbalance in the book as a whole. Since my analysis of the rhetorical sense of 
ekphrasis stresses the inclusiveness of the term, such a final chapter ought to analyze examples of poetic 
ekphrasis of all types of subject matter: battles, people, animals, landscapes. Needless to say, this is a 
gargantuan task that is far better undertaken in a series of separate studies of authors, genres or 
categories of subject.   8
7 See, to name but three examples, Alessandro 
, ‘L’inversione speculare: per una retorica dell’
Perutelli
ekphrasis’, 
, 1 (1978): 87–98; Andrew 
, ‘Sounding out ekphrasis: art and text in Catullus 64’, 
MD
Laird
, 83 (1993): 18–30; Froma 
, ‘The artful eye: vision, ekphrasis and spectacle in Euripidean 
JRS
Zeitlin
theatre’, in Simon Goldhill and Robin Osborne (eds), 
 
Art and Text in Ancient Greek Culture
(Cambridge, 1994), pp. 138–96.
8 See, for example, Jean-Pierre 
, 
Aygon Pictor in fabula: l’ecphrasis-descriptio dans les tragédies de 
 (Brussels, 2004) and Janice Hewlett 
, 
Sénèque
Koelb The Poetics of Description: Imagined Places in 
 (New York, 2006).
European Literature
What This Book Is About
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:19.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 12-26 | Printed page 3 of 12


── PAGE 5 ──
This book is an exploration of a particular phenomenon in ancient rhetorical theory and practice: the use 
of language to try to make an audience imagine a scene. It mines the rhetorical handbooks of the first 
centuries CE in order to clarify as far as possible how a particular phenomenon was understood and 
taught and how it fitted into the wider system of rhetorical theory and practice. This means first of all 
analyzing the (often frustrating) definitions of ekphrasis in the 
 and supplementing their 
Progymnasmata
laconic comments by reference to more forthcoming sources such as the first-century Roman rhetorician 
Quintilian, who supplements rhetorical precepts with accounts of his first-hand experience in the courts. 
From this study there emerges a clear set of ideas about the word’s ability to summon up images in the 
listener’s mind and about the ways in which an orator might need to make use of this technique in very 
specific ways to bolster his case. The 
, with the help of Quintilian’s insights, help 
Progymnasmata
explain the uses of ekphrasis and similar techniques discussed in the more advanced Greek rhetorical 
manuals on epideictic (occasional speeches) and declamation (judicial and deliberative speeches treating 
fictive cases). The use of ekphrasis in epideictic is familiar, and Menander Rhetor’s manuals on the topic 
are relatively accessible in their presentation of the topic. But the Greek technical handbooks on 
declamation are a very different matter. Fortunately, recent studies and translations by Donald Russell, 
Malcolm Heath, Michel Patillon, George Kennedy and others have opened up this highly technical and 
specialized field, making it possible to trace the uses of ekphrasis in declamation.   9
9 See, in particular, Donald R. 
, 
 (Cambridge, 1983); Lucia 
Russell Greek Declamation
Calboli 
, 
 (Hildesheim, 1986); Michel 
, 
Montefusco La dottrina degli status nella retorica greca e romana
Patillon
La Théorie du discours chez Hermogène le Rhéteur: essai sur les structures linguistiques de la 
 (Paris, 1988) and his translation and commentary of Hermogenes: 
rhétorique ancienne
Hermogène: l’art 
 (Paris, 1997); Malcolm 
, 
rhétorique
Heath Hermogenes on Issues: Strategies of Argument in Later Greek 
 (Oxford, 1995) and George A. 
, 
Rhetoric
Kennedy Hermogenes, Invention and Method: Two Rhetorical 
 (Atlanta, 2005).
Treatises from the Hermogenic Corpus Translated with Introduction and Notes
Looking at ekphrasis in the context of the rhetorical handbooks is revealing. First of all, this approach 
underlines the close interconnections between Quintilian and the Greek sources on rhetoric. It also 
shows that the use of ekphrasis was certainly not confined to rhetoric, all our sources make clear that it 
was used in history and poetry too. But, in the period we are dealing with, rhetoric enjoyed great 
prestige; it was an active practice studied by a large proportion of male members of the elite and was the 
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:19.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 12-26 | Printed page 4 of 12


── PAGE 6 ──
focus of much of their intellectual energy. In the case of rhetoric, we have evidence for the methods of 
training in the handbooks while the surviving examples of declamation and epideictic speeches show the 
direct results of this training whose indirect results are also evident in other sorts of composition.
It is also important to specify the type of relationship between rhetorical theory and rhetorical practice 
that is assumed in this book. The interest of the handbooks does not lie simply in the provision of a 
schema against which finished compositions can be measured, identified and judged.
  Instead, the 
    
10
rhetorical manuals reveal to the modern reader the rich network of ideas and assumptions that underlay 
the composition and reception of ancient texts. These assumptions are often very different from our own, 
as might be expected when we take into consideration the fact that the culture of the Imperial period was 
still very much an oral culture, despite the importance of the written word. The phenomenon of 
ekphrasis that emerges from this study belongs to a conception of the word as a force acting on the 
listener, a conception that is familiar from Gorgias’ 
 but which clearly continued to 
Enkomion of Helen
be active throughout antiquity and beyond, into Byzantium. An investigation of ekphrasis in this sense 
also reveals some of the energies that dwell within the texts that, to us, are black words lying still on the 
white page but which, to the ancient reader, were alive with rich visual and emotional effects. The nature 
of ekphrasis, its defining quality of 
 (or ‘vividness’), and the role of the imagination in both 
enargeia
mean that this is almost as much a study of ancient psychology as of rhetoric.
10 For example, Francis 
, 
 (Edinburgh, 1972) 
Cairns Generic Composition in Greek and Roman Poetry
represents a vitally important development in the study of ancient literature and its reception but tends to 
be over-prescriptive in its use of rhetorical theory. See the general comments of Goldhill, ‘What is 
ekphrasis for?’, p. 7.
The study of the ancient definition of ekphrasis is therefore far from being the restrictive move that it is 
sometimes claimed (whether explicitly or implicitly) to be. It is, I hope, a positive contribution which 
opens up new perspectives on the rhetorical culture of the Imperial period and on the attitudes to 
language and verbal representation that were current at that time. The aim of focusing on the ancient 
definition is not to close down discussion of the phenomenon of ‘words about images’ either in ancient 
or modern literature nor to brand certain usages of the word as ‘incorrect’. Rather it is to create a space 
for the ancient definition and to underline quite how different it and its underlying concepts are to our 
own ideas about texts and literature.
The Modernity of the Modern Definition
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:19.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 12-26 | Printed page 5 of 12


── PAGE 7 ──
In considering the difference between ancient and modern ekphrasis it is important to bear in mind 
exactly how recent the modern definition is. One searches in vain for any unambiguous use of the term 
to mean ‘description of a work of art’ in any source before the late nineteenth century.
  It did not 
    
11
become current in critical discourse until the second half of the twentieth century and only then was it 
applied regularly to modern literature as well as to Greek and Latin texts. In earlier periods, on the rare 
occasions when the term was employed in the modern European languages, it retained its ancient range 
of meaning.
  The modern usage is the result of a series of transformations which took place gradually 
    
12
and unevenly, with the result that it is possible to find scholars using the word in different ways at the 
same period.
11 Ekphrasis is not used, to my knowledge, in Gotthold Ephraim Lessing’s seminal work on painting and 
poetry, 
. Paul 
, 
Laokoon
Friedländer Johannes von Gaza und Paulus Silentiarius: Kunstbeschreibungen 
 (Leipzig and Berlin, 1912) uses the term ‘Bildbeschreibung’ [description of a 
Justinianischer Zeit
picture] and reserves ekphrasis only for texts that fell into the ancient category. Othmar Schissel von 
, ‘Die Technik des Bildeinsatzes’, 
, 72 (1913): 83–114 and Jean 
, 
Fleschenberg
Philologus
Seznec
‘Flaubert and the graphic arts’, 
, 8 (1945): 175–90 also discuss the subject without recourse to the 
JWCI
term ‘ekphrasis’.
12 The first usage of ‘ecfrasi’ in Italian is a case in point. According to Battaglia’s Grande dizionario 
, the term occurs in Gregorio Comanini’s 
 of 1591 (ed. Barocchi, p. 310). 
della lingua italiana
Il Figino
The passage in question is taken directly from the Latin translation of the Acts of the Council of Nicaea 
in 
, ed. F.L. 
 (Colonia Agrippina, 1567) vol. 3, p. 94 (Synodi Nicenae Secundae 
Concilia omnia
Sarius
action quarta), which transliterates the term directly from the Greek original. Although the ekphrasis in 
question is of paintings, it is not necessary to assume that Comanini understood the term as referring to a 
genre specialized in this type of description or of ‘art criticism’. The first usage in English, in the 
 of 1815, is similarly ambiguous. The anonymous author refers only to ‘an ecphrasis 
Edinburgh Review
of Libanius’ and, as the fourth-century orator and teacher Libanios composed ekphraseis of the whole 
range of subjects, it is far from sure that he was referring only to his ekphraseis of works of art, as is 
assumed by Grant F. 
, ‘The rhetoric of dilation: ekphrasis and ideology’, 
, 7 
Scott
Word and Image
(1991): 301–10 and 
 (Hanover, NH, 1994) in 
The Sculpted Word: Keats, Ekphrasis, and the Visual Arts
what is otherwise an extremely perceptive analysis.
Broadly, it is possible to distinguish four types of usage. The first is a simple transliteration from the 
Greek: ekphrasis (or its equivalents in other European languages) is used in the same contexts and of the 
same texts as the ancient Greek term. In the second, the term is used of those ancient examples of 
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:19.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 12-26 | Printed page 6 of 12


── PAGE 8 ──
ekphrasis that happen to describe works of art (and/or architecture). One example of this second stage is 
J.D. Denniston’s definition of ekphrasis as ‘the rhetorical description of a work of art, one of the types of 
’, citing Philostratos’ 
, the lost 
 of Nikostratos, Lucian’s 
 and 
progymnasma
Eikones
Eikones
de Domo
Kallistratos’ ekphraseis of statues as examples in the first edition of the 
, 
Oxford Classical Dictionary
published in 1949.
  The third usage includes any ancient texts about art and is exemplified by 
    
13
Glanville Downey’s entry on ‘Ekphrasis’ published ten years later in the Reallexikon für Antike und 
, which starts from the Shield of Achilles and includes descriptions of works of art from epic 
Christentum
and tragedy. The fourth sense in which the term is used is the far broader ‘words about art’, conceived as 
encompassing texts of any genre from any culture or period of history (though very often appealing to 
the Homeric Shield of Achilles as the inescapable ur-ekphrasis).
13 Koelb, 
, pp. 2–3, underlines the importance of Denniston’s new definition, 
The Poetics of Description
which, as she points out, is contradicted by the entry on the 
 in the same volume.
Progymnasmata
These meanings are genetically related and it is possible to trace the gradual and uneven process of 
evolution. I have argued elsewhere that interest in texts like Philostratos’ 
 (ekphraseis that have 
Eikones
works of art as their subject) led to those particular ekphraseis coming to be seen as representative of 
ekphrasis 
.
  I shall retrace some aspects of this process at the end of 
; here it is 
tout court     
14
Chapter 1
sufficient to cite one example that reveals one way in which the process of restriction took place. The 
origin of Denniston’s definition of ekphrasis as a rhetorical description of a work of art lies in the 
German 
 published by Friedrich Lübker in 1914 which served as a 
Reallexikon des klassischen Altertums
model for the first 
.
  Here ekphrasis is defined as ‘rhetorical description, 
Oxford Classical Dictionary     
15
 of a painting, one of the 
’ (‘rhetorische Beschreibung, 
 eines Bildes, die 
mostly
Progymnasmata
zumeist
man zu den Progymnasmata zählte’) and illustrated by the same examples as in the 
 entry. Lübker 
OCD
may overstate the importance of paintings among the ancient subjects of ekphrasis but he makes clear 
that these ekphraseis are only part of a larger group. Denniston’s entry, however, leaves out the crucial 
adverb 
, a simple change that turns ekphrasis into an ancient genre specializing in the 
zumeist
descriptions of paintings. A seemingly tiny detail of translation in a work considered as authoritative 
may thus have contributed to the transformation of ekphrasis.   
16
14 Webb, ‘Ekphrasis ancient and modern’.
15 Friedrich Lübker, 
 (Leipzig and Berlin, 1914).
Reallexikon des Klassischen Altertums
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:19.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 12-26 | Printed page 7 of 12


── PAGE 9 ──
16 Koelb, 
, p. 2 suggests that Denniston’s entry may have inspired Leo Spitzer’
The Poetics of Description
s redefinition of ekphrasis in ‘The “Ode on a Grecian Urn”, or content vs. metagrammar’, Comparative 
, 7 (1955): 203–25. For further discussion of Spitzer’s article, see 
.
Literature
Chapter 1
Ekphrasis and Description
If the only difference between the ancient and modern definitions were the presence or absence of a 
certain category of subject matter, the question would deserve a few lines of discussion at most. And, if 
the absence of ‘works of art’ meant that ekphrasis was fully assimilable to ‘description’ as commonly 
understood nowadays, there would also be little more to say. But this is not the case. The most important 
difference between ekphrasis and the category of ‘descriptions of works of art’ lies not in the categories 
of subject matter envisaged for each but in the criteria by which the two groups are defined. It is the 
common type of referent – ‘the work of art’ – that makes it possible to classify an epigram on Myron’s 
cow alongside the Shield of Achilles and a passage from Pausanias (not to mention Keats’ 
). Yet in 
Ode
the ancient definition the referent is only of secondary importance; what matters, as we have seen, is the 
impact on the listener. The ancient and modern categories of ekphrasis are thus formed on entirely 
different grounds, and are ultimately incommensurate, belonging as they do to radically different 
systems.
If it seems natural to us now to group descriptions according to subject matter it is probably because 
description itself is popularly conceived as treating a particular class of referent: static objects or persons 
assimilated to static objects. (The neoclassical critical tradition had, moreover, encouraged the idea that 
descriptions could and should be classified by their subject matter.)
  As summed up by Don 
, 
    
17
Fowler
‘narrative is about people, description deals with things.’
  This very basic distinction is famously 
    
18
identified by Gérard 
 as one of the main characteristics of the modern conception of literature, 
Genette
and has naturally been refined and questioned by many critics who have pointed out, among other 
things, the practical difficulties involved in separating narration from description once one begins to 
analyze a text.
  These ideas – the strict division between narration and description and the association 
    
19
of description with static, non-human or dehumanized referents – are absent from the ancient accounts. 
Instead we find a marked continuity between ekphrasis and narration and explicit statements that the two 
modes share the same group of referents, as set out in 
 below.
Chapter 3
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:19.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 12-26 | Printed page 8 of 12


── PAGE 10 ──
17 See Jean-Michel 
, 
 (Paris, 1993), pp. 32–9. Terms such as 
 and 
Adam La Description
chronographia
 do occur in ancient rhetorical treatises but, as we shall see, were not central to the treatment 
topographia
of ekphrasis.
18 Don Fowler, ‘Narrate and describe: the problem of ekphrasis’, 
, 81 (1991), p. 26 (with a useful 
JRS
survey). See also Philippe 
, ‘Qu’est-ce qu’une description?’, 
, 112 (1972), p. 465; Mieke 
Hamon
Poétique
, 
 (Toronto, 1985), p. 130: ‘we will … define a 
Bal Narratology: Introduction to the Theory of Narrative
description as a textual fragment in which features are attributed to objects’; Georg 
, ‘Narrate or 
Lukács
describe?’, in 
, ed. A. Kahn (London, 1978), p. 127 points to the modernity of this 
Writer and Critic
conception of description when he associates it with the objectification of humanity by capitalism.
19 Gérard Genette, ‘Frontières du récit’, in 
 (Paris, 1981), p. 162: ‘L’
L’Analyse structurale du récit
opposition entre narration et description, d’ailleurs accentuée par la tradition scolaire, est un des traits 
majeurs de notre conscience littéraire’ [The opposition between narration and description, which, I 
should add, has been accentuated by traditional methods of teaching, is one of the most important 
characteristics of our understanding of literature].
By contrast, the emphasis given in the ancient definitions of ekphrasis to effect, over and above any 
formal or referential characteristics, is striking: an ekphrasis can be of any length, of any subject matter, 
composed in verse or prose, using any verbal techniques, as long as it ‘brings its subject before the eyes’ 
or, as one of the ancient authors says, ‘makes listeners into spectators’. Mere words are credited with the 
ability to make absent things seem present to the spellbound listeners, to control the contents of the most 
intimate of faculties, the imagination. So, while the visual arts may be literally absent from this 
definition of ekphrasis, and from most of the discussions by ancient rhetoricians, the 
 of the visual 
idea
underpins this mode of speech which rivals the effects of painting or sculpture, creating virtual images in 
the listener’s mind.
It is these basic underpinnings of ancient ekphrasis that make it of interest as well as distinguishing it 
from the modern usages of the term. The aim of an investigation of ancient ekphrasis is, far from simply 
pointing out how different the modern definition is, to set the ancient theory and practice in its own 
context, one in which the concepts of ‘literature’ and ‘art’ did not have their modern contours and in 
which language played a different role. In this context, it is difficult to find exact equivalences between 
modern literary terminology which was developed mainly for the analysis of written texts 
(predominantly prose fiction and poetry) and ancient categories of thought. ‘Description’ is a case in 
point. Although it is the nearest equivalent to ancient ekphrasis (‘descriptio’ in Latin) and will be used 
frequently in this book as a translation, its connotations are very different, as is only to be expected of a 
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:19.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 12-26 | Printed page 9 of 12


── PAGE 11 ──
term that has been defined and discussed with reference to the written word rather than live, oral 
performance.
Outline
Chapter 1 sets the scene and, after a brief overview of the cultural context to which the ancient definition 
and use of ekphrasis belong, explores the importance of the visual imagination in the ancient reception 
of texts of all kinds. The chapter finishes with a more detailed analysis of the formation of the modern 
meaning of the term which stresses the very different cultural contexts within which this took place and 
the different interests that motivated it. My exploration of the ancient conception of ekphrasis begins in 
 with the definition of the term in the 
 and continues in 
 which 
Chapter 2
Progymnasmata
Chapter 3
focuses on the range of subject matter prescribed for ekphrasis. The interest of the subjects lies not only 
in their variety (from battles to crocodiles, from figures to battlements) but in the way in which the 
precise categories used serve to tie ekphrasis into the broader rhetorical context.
These handbooks represent a stage in the students’ rhetorical training (a point made by Paul Friedländer) 
and give us a glimpse of a pedagogical practice designed to instil certain habits in students.
  They 
    
20
present the advantage of revealing the types of assumptions about language that were assimilated by the 
student at a very early stage but, for the same reason, there is a limit to what they can tell us in isolation. 
As text
 they lack the background of oral explanation, practice and example which would have 
books
complemented them in antiquity. As elementary exercises they do not begin to answer questions such as 
how and why ekphrasis should be used, or why it should be included in a 
 training at all.
rhetorical
20 See Ruth 
, ‘The 
 as practice’, in Yun Lee 
 (ed.), 
Webb
Progymnasmata
Too
Education in Greek and 
 (Leiden, 2001), pp. 289–316.
Roman Antiquity
If, however, one places the 
 in the wider contexts of rhetorical training in general and of 
Progymnasmata
ancient assumptions about language and psychology which were so widespread as to hardly need 
articulating, a fuller picture emerges. Ekphrasis was a technique used to make the audience feel involved 
in the subject matter, to make them feel as if they were at the scene of a crime, or that they themselves 
witnessed the achievements for which an emperor is being praised. 
 and  turn to the first-
Chapters 4
5
century Roman rhetorician Quintilian for an explanation of the rhetorical uses of ‘placing before the 
eyes’ and the psychological background to 
 and ekphrasis. In particular, ancient conceptions of 
enargeia
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:19.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 12-26 | Printed page 10 of 12


── PAGE 12 ──
two closely linked faculties – memory and imagination – are essential to the power of ekphrasis to 
appeal to the emotions, and also help to explain why rhetoricians could be so confident about the effect 
vivid language would have on an audience.
Chapter 6 analyses some examples of the use of ekphrasis in both declamation and epideictic as 
prescribed by the more advanced Greek handbooks of the Imperial period that represent the next stage in 
rhetorical training after the 
. This analysis shows first that ekphrasis was indeed 
Progymnasmata
conceived as a means of achieving persuasion, of altering the listeners’ perception of the subject in a 
way that helped the orator to win their assent. Secondly, we see the close interconnections between 
ekphrasis in the Greek tradition and Quintilian’s comments on 
 and, finally, ekphrasis in 
enargeia
epideictic contexts is shown to have a persuasive function.
Rhetoricians stress the ability of the word to create illusions, for obvious reasons. But their discussions 
are littered with phrases which betray the ‘as if’-ness of both ekphrasis and 
 and the ambiguous 
enargeia
status of the mental images they produce. The audience both sees (metaphorically) and fails to see 
(literally) the subject matter. Ekphrasis is therefore a powerful type of fiction and is central to the 
explorations of the language’s ability to create a universe of likeness that Barbara Cassin has identified 
as typical of the Second Sophistic.
  
 therefore explores the fictional nature of ekphrasis by 
    
21 Chapter 7
looking at instances outside purely rhetorical texts, in the novel, for example, where authors seem to 
draw attention to the fictional nature of their ekphraseis. It is also possible to apply the reading of 
ekphrasis as fiction to properly rhetorical usages. Declamations are themselves fictional speeches, a fact 
which makes the ekphraseis they contain a fiction within a fiction, engaging the audience in a complex 
combination of acquiescence to and awareness of the illusion. Even the uses of ekphrasis in epideictic 
speeches, referring as they do to the world known to the audience, can be shown to rely to a certain 
extent on the ultimate failure of the word to fulfil the task of ‘placing before the eyes’. Loss and 
separation were recurring themes in the epideictic speaker’s repertoire as his speeches marked the 
departures and arrivals, births and deaths that punctuated the lives of the elite and of their cities. The 
ekphraseis in epideictic in fact often rely for their effect on the acknowledgement that the word cannot 
replace the actual presence of a person or of a place.
21 Barbara 
, 
 (Paris, 1995).
Cassin L’Effet sophistique
Conclusion
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:19.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 12-26 | Printed page 11 of 12


── PAGE 13 ──
It should be clear by now to anyone expecting to read about descriptions of works of art (if they are still 
reading) that they have opened the wrong book. However, I hope that they will continue reading. 
Descriptions of paintings, sculptures and buildings (even the Shield of Achilles) are discussed as the 
context requires and there is much else that is relevant to the study of the interaction of text and image. It 
is also important to stress that this book is not based on the assumption that only ancient categories can 
be used to analyze texts, simply that ancient categories are worthy of interest in their own right, 
particularly if we wish to understand more fully the contexts in which the texts we have were composed 
and some of the ways in which they might have been received and understood by contemporaries.
It is ironic that the modern meaning (which after all has been current for only about half a century at the 
time of writing) should have almost totally eclipsed the ancient meaning.
  The late-twentieth-century 
    
22
fascination with the phenomenon of ‘descriptions of works of art’ has proved extremely fruitful, in 
particular in encouraging interdisciplinary exchanges between classical scholars and specialists in other 
periods of literature and, to some extent, between literary scholars and historians of art and 
archaeologists. However, this achievement has been at the expense of the ancient meaning, which is 
often acknowledged only to be ignored. The present book aims to fill this lacuna.
22 Page 
, ‘Reading the writing on the wall’, 
, 102 (2007): 45 recalls a publisher’s 
DuBois
CP
unwillingness to allow the term ‘ekphrasis’ to be included in the title of a book because of its 
unfamiliarity. Now it can be difficult to publish a book with the word ‘ekphrasis’ in the title that does not
focus on descriptions of works of art.
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:19.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 12-26 | Printed page 12 of 12


── PAGE 14 ──
1 The Contexts of Ekphrasis
DOI: 10.4324/9781315578996-1
Interest in ancient art and aesthetics was a vital impetus to the creation of the modern definition of 
ekphrasis. Another, altogether less positive, factor was the general lack of curiosity in the first part of the 
twentieth century about the rhetorical culture of the Roman period (particularly the Greek rhetorical 
culture which could only be seen as a disastrous falling off from the sublime heights of the classical 
period). It is this disdain that may well have allowed so meticulous a linguist as Denniston to disregard 
the ancient definition. The results of these combined phenomena can be seen in the vision of both 
ekphrasis and the rhetoric of the Imperial period in Roland Barthes’ overview of ancient rhetoric, 
published in 1970. Here Barthes cites ekphrasis as the typical product of an age when, he claims, 
rhetoric had given up any claim to persuasion and was purely for show. Ekphrasis, defined as a self-
contained, detachable fragment, was typical of the type of discourse that resulted – that is to say a 
loosely connected patchwork of passages.
  Barthes’ picture derives from a once pervasive view of the 
    
1
Greek rhetorical practice of the Roman period as the decadent pastime of the disenfranchised who, 
without a proper forum in which to flex their rhetorical muscles, engaged in sterile semblances of 
debate. The picture offered by Barthes is a significantly updated version that rightly stresses the role of 
improvisation in the rhetorical performance of the time and the interaction between rhetoric and 
‘literature’ in the case of the novel. However, it is difficult, if not impossible, to accept the 
characterization of declamation as a disconnected series of passages after reading theoretical works on 
the subject such as those by Hermogenes which reveal a highly structured approach in which persuasion 
was still the main goal.
1 Roland Barthes, ‘L’ancienne rhétorique: aide-mémoire’, 
, 16 (1970): 183: ‘Le discours 
Communications
étant sans but persuasif mais purement ostentatoire, se déstructure, s’atomise en une suite lâche de 
morceaux brillants, juxtaposés selon un modèle rhapsodique. Le principal de ces morceaux (il bénéficiait 
d’une très grosse cote) était la 
 ou 
 est un fragment anthologique, 
descriptio
ekphrasis. L’ekphrasis
transférable d’un discours à un autre …’ [Since speeches had no persuasive purpose but were purely a 
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:52.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 27-60 | Printed page 1 of 27


── PAGE 15 ──
matter of display, they lost all structure and broke down into a loosely connected series of brilliant 
passages, strung together like a rhapsode’s song. The most important of these passages – it was highly 
prized – was 
 or 
. Ekphrasis is a select fragment, which can be transferred from one 
descriptio
ekphrasis
speech to another …]. On the idiosyncrasies of Barthes’ overview of ancient rhetoric, see David 
, 
Cohen
‘Classical rhetoric and modern theories of discourse’, in Ian Worthington (ed.), Persuasion: Greek 
 (London, 1994), pp. 76–7.
Rhetoric in Action
The Context of Ancient Ekphrasis
The 
 which offer the definitions of ekphrasis as ‘a speech that brings the subject matter 
Progymnasmata
vividly before the eyes’
  belong to the first centuries CE. The version by Ailios Theon is usually 
    
2
accepted as the earliest and dated to the first century, while those by a certain Nikolaos are dated to the 
fifth century.
  Between lie the third-century version wrongly attributed in antiquity to the famous 
    
3
rhetorician Hermogenes of Tarsos and those of Aphthonios from the fourth century. To the information 
offered by the 
 can be added Quintilian’s discussion of 
 and the advice on the 
Progymnasmata
enargeia
use of ekphrasis in the context of larger speeches to be found in the more advanced rhetorical treatises 
by Hermogenes (second century), Menander Rhetor (later third century), Sopatros Rhetor (fourth 
century) and Syrianos (fifth century). All these authors are witnesses to the rich rhetorical culture that 
flourished in the Greek-speaking areas of the Roman Empire and survived in the Byzantine Middle Ages 
(to a far greater extent than in the medieval West). Throughout this period the study of rhetoric 
dominated the education of the elite and mastery both of the Attic dialect and of rhetorical forms of 
exposition was a prerequisite for many careers, even for acceptance as a male member of the elite, and a 
central element in certain conceptions of Greekness.
2 See, for example, Theon, 
, 118, l. 7: #κφρασίς #στι λόγoς περιηγηματικ#ς #vαργω#ς 
Progymnasmata
#π’ #ψιv #γωv τ# δηλoύμεvov.
3 Malcolm 
, ‘Theon and the history of the 
’, 
, 43 (2002/3): 129–60 argues for 
Heath
Progymnasmata
GRBS
a much later date for Theon, identifying him with the fifth-century rhetorician of the same name. I prefer 
to retain the earlier date because of the parallels with Quintilian and the unusual use of Hellenistic 
historians while acknowledging that these are by no means decisive criteria.
For more humble families who could nevertheless afford to educate their sons, a training in rhetoric 
offered a chance for the talented to improve their social position. This is the picture drawn by the 
‘autobiography’ of the second-century Syrian Lucian, who depicts his young self torn between his own 
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:52.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 27-60 | Printed page 2 of 27


── PAGE 16 ──
desire to study rhetoric (
) and his family’s demands that he earn a living as a sculptor. 
 
paideia
Paideia
personified offers fame, fortune and travel to the young Lucian in contrast to a life of toil in the 
workshop.
  The type of fame and fortune to which Lucian refers is exemplified in Philostratos’ 
    
4
Lives of 
, a collective portrait of the most famous Greek exponents of the art of rhetoric in the second 
the Sophists
and early third centuries (among whom Lucian is not counted). The accounts of charismatic star teachers 
and speakers described by Philostratos, who coined the term ‘Second Sophistic’ to describe the 
phenomenon, give a vivid impression of the glamour and popularity of rhetorical display at the period: 
speakers drew large audiences who adulated them but who could also be skilled listeners able to criticize 
the performances they listened to.
4 Lucian, 
, 1–13.
The Dream or His Life
Philostratos’ Sophists performed declamations (
), fictional speeches that also formed part of the 
meletai
rhetorical training delivered in schools. These 
 were speeches on imaginary cases in which the 
meletai
speaker took on the persona of a character in a situation specially formulated to pose a particular 
rhetorical problem. Many of the cases were set in the classical Greek past (none post-date the death of 
Alexander in 323 BCE) and involved characters such as Perikles or Demosthenes in situations more or 
less loosely based on history. Others were imaginary but involved a stock cast of characters drawn from 
the world of the classical 
: the young hero, the rich man, the general, the tyrant, the orator. 
polis
Declamation demanded a certain dramatic talent from its exponents who had to speak in persona 
(Philostratos mentions Polemo’s habit of leaping up from his chair at the climax of his argument and of 
stamping on the ground, while Herodes Attikos is said at one point to have had tears in his eyes as he 
declaimed on a particularly emotive subject).
  But, above all, it required precise skills of analysis and 
    
5
argumentation and a mastery of presentation and style (all in irreproachable atticizing Greek). It was the 
structures provided by this training (rather than the lack of them as Barthes claims) that allowed the best 
declaimers to improvise lengthy and complex speeches.
5 Philostratos, 
, 537 and 574.
Lives of the Sophists
The other principle public activity of Philostratos’ sophists was epideictic oratory: occasional speeches 
marking significant moments in citizens’ lives or in the life of the city. By the Roman period, the range 
of occasions for such speeches was vast: they marked the arrivals and departures of dignitaries or even 
pupils within a school, invitations to governors, weddings, deaths and funerals and festivals. Nor was 
there a complete absence of occasions for more obviously practical uses of rhetoric: Philostratos 
mentions several cases where these rhetorical performers and teachers had to use their art in their own 
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:52.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 27-60 | Printed page 3 of 27


── PAGE 17 ──
defence in court, and city councils – 
 – still provided a forum for debate among the wealthy elite.
 
boulai
    
6
In the fourth century, when power was concentrated more directly in the person of the emperor, Libanios 
used his rhetorical skills to try to persuade Theodosios of various changes that should be made in the 
administration of Antioch.
  Just as importantly, Malcolm 
 has shown how the skills taught in the 
    
7
Heath
rhetorical schools could be put to use in actual court cases.   8
6 See Laurent 
, 
 (2 vols, Paris, 1993) and 
Pernot La Rhétorique de l’éloge dans le monde gréco-romain
La 
 (Paris, 2000), pp. 104–7 (on the survival of political rhetoric after the battle 
Rhétorique dans l’Antiquité
of Chaeronea); John 
, ‘Public speech and community in the 
’, in Simon Swain (ed.), 
Ma
Euboicus
Dio 
 (Oxford, 2002).
Chrysostom_ Politics, Letters, and Philosophy
7 For one example, see Bernard 
, ‘Un enseignant face aux prisons de son temps’, 
, 72 
Schouler
Pallas
(2006): 279–96.
8 Malcolm Heath, ‘Practical advocacy in Roman Egypt’, in Michael J. Edwards and Christopher Reid 
(eds), 
 (Manchester, 2004), pp. 62–82.
Oratory in Action
The case of Augustine in fourth-century North Africa illustrates the continued importance of a rhetorical 
education: though not wealthy, Augustine’s family were determined to allow him to develop his talent 
by sending him to Madauros and then to Carthage in the hope that his studies would lead to a 
distinguished career as an advocate.
  His trajectory is very similar to that depicted in Lucian’s 
 
    
9
Dream
and illustrates the uses to which a rhetorical training could be put in an increasingly Christian context. 
Augustine was certainly not alone. In the Greek East the fourth century saw the continuing importance 
of rhetorical training as offered by men like Libanios and his rival teachers, many of whose pupils were 
Christians. The talent of these Greek Christian rhetors of the fourth century – Gregory of Nyssa, his 
brother Basil of Caesarea and Basil’s friend Gregory Nazianzen, who studied rhetoric with him at 
Athens – has led to them being identified as part of a ‘Third Sophistic’, a title that emphasizes the 
continued value and relevance of rhetoric beyond the third century.   
10
9 Augustine, 
, II, iii (5) and III, iii (6) – iv (7).
Confessions
10 See, for example, Averil 
, 
Cameron Christianity and the Rhetoric of Empire: The Development of 
 (Berkeley, 1991); Peter 
, 
Christian Discourse
Brown Power and Persuasion in Late Antiquity: Towards a 
 (Madison, 1992); Eugenio 
 (ed.), 
Christian Empire
Amato
Approches de la Troisième Sophistique: 
 (Brussels, 2006).
hommages à Jacques Schamp
Recent studies of the Second Sophistic have rightly emphasized the social, political and cultural 
functions of rhetorical performance as a means of communicating power and negotiating identity.
  The 
    
11
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:52.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 27-60 | Printed page 4 of 27


── PAGE 18 ──
predominance of classical themes made declamation a means of asserting and exploring Greek identity.   
12
  So, while orators may no longer have been at the forefront of politics, as in classical Athens or 
Republican Rome, rhetorical performance provided an important forum for the Greek citizens of the 
Empire to assert their identity, to achieve social status among their peers and their contemporaries and 
was one of the principal media in which relationships with Rome and the representatives of the Empire 
were constructed.   
13
11 See, for example, Maud 
, 
 
Gleason Making Men: Sophists and Self-presentation in Ancient Rome
(Princeton, 1995); Thomas 
, 
Schmitz Bildung und Macht: Zur sozialen und politischen Funktion der 
 (Munich, 1997); Tim 
, 
zweiten Sophistik in der griechischen Welt der Kaiserzeit
Whitmarsh Greek 
 (Oxford, 2001).
Literature and the Roman Empire
12 See the seminal work of Ewen L. 
, ‘Greeks and their past in the Second Sophistic’, in Moses I. 
Bowie
Finley (ed.), 
 (London, 1974), pp. 116–209 and Paolo 
, ‘Filostrato: la 
Studies in Ancient Society
Desideri
comtemporaneità del passato greco’, in Fernando Gascó and Emma Falque (eds), Pasado renacido: Uso 
 (Seville, 1992), pp. 55–70.
y abuso de la tradición clásica
13 See on this point Laurent 
, ‘La rhétorique de l’empire ou comment la rhétorique grecque a 
Pernot
inventé l’empire romain’, 
, 16 (1998): 131–48.
Rhetorica
It is equally important not to lose sight of the more technical aspects of the art of rhetoric and its 
continued utility as an intellectual training with many applications. Malcolm Heath, for example, has 
recently stressed the value of the rhetorical education offered in the schools of the Imperial period and 
the very practical considerations that ensured its survival.
  He has also shown the continuing vitality of 
    
14
the rhetorical tradition beyond the second- and early-third-century period portrayed by Philostratos. The 
 textbooks belong to this long history of rhetoric, spanning as they do the first five 
Progymnasmata
centuries CE, and showing the continued processes of adaptation and reflection that took place.
14 Malcolm 
, 
 (Oxford, 2004), esp. pp. 277–331.
Heath Menander: A Rhetor in Context
Rhetoric: Theory and Practice
The principle sources for the rhetorical conception of ekphrasis, the 
, consist primarily 
Progymnasmata
of a set of definitions and instructions for the various exercises, of which ekphrasis was one. The value 
of these exercises for us lies precisely in their elementary status. As the gateway through which every 
rhetorically educated person passed (and the final stage in the education of those who could not find the 
time or the money to achieve a full rhetorical training), they reveal assumptions about language and 
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:52.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 27-60 | Printed page 5 of 27


── PAGE 19 ──
ways of reading exemplary classical authors which were inculcated at an early age.
  In particular, the 
    
15
 represented a process of transition from reading to speaking, the moment when the 
Progymnasmata
schoolboy, whether in Egypt, Syria or Asia Minor, now primed with examples and mastery of the 
classical Attic idiom still used in high-level discourse, first began to put together his own compositions 
and to learn to be heard as well as to listen. The most important thing that students learned by working 
through the 
 was not rules as such but a set of practices and skills that could be put to 
Progymnasmata
use in (or transferred to) the composition of full-scale speeches or other types of composition.   
16
15 On ancient education and its social implications, see Robert A. 
, 
Kaster Guardians of Language: The 
 (Berkeley, 1988); Teresa 
, 
Grammarian and Society in Late Antiquity
Morgan Literate Education in the 
 (Cambridge, 1998); Yun Lee 
 (ed.), 
Hellenistic and Roman Worlds
Too
Education in Greek and Roman 
 (Leiden, 2001). Raffaella 
, 
 (Princeton 
Antiquity
Cribiore The School of Libanius in Late Antique Antioch
and Oxford, 2007), p. 146, suggests that for many students the 
 would have represented 
Progymnasmata
the bulk of the rhetorical training they received.
16 See, for example, Jean 
, 
 (Paris, 1992), pp. 
Bouffartigue L’Empereur Julien et la culture de son temps
523–33.
The 
 were therefore neither abstract nor isolated from the rest of the cultural context. 
Progymnasmata
Their purpose was to prepare students for a life of speaking in which the failure to use the socially 
sanctioned forms at the macro level of speeches or the micro level of grammar and vocabulary could 
lead to serious embarrassment.
  They were also part of a preparation for a life of critical and agonistic 
    
17
listening. The mention in the definition of ekphrasis of ‘placing the subject before the eyes’ (
) 
hup’opsin
is therefore far from theoretical. This was an effect that students were taught to expect to feel for 
themselves when they read Homer or Thucydides, the most frequently cited sources. But it did not end 
there. The point of this reading was ultimately to enable students to work the same effect on others as 
they themselves became active users of rhetoric, first of all in their elementary ekphraseis and later in the 
full-scale speeches they would compose and perform for their peers in the rhetorical schools and in the 
wider world. The discussions of ekphrasis in the 
 and in other rhetorical treatises show 
Progymnasmata
how future citizens were taught to participate in its power both as readers or listeners and as speakers. 
They thus learned to situate themselves as part of a continuous tradition stretching from Homer to the 
Roman present and to see themselves as involved in a reciprocal process, reproducing the 
 that the 
effect
classical models had on them on their own audiences.
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:52.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 27-60 | Printed page 6 of 27


── PAGE 20 ──
17 See, for example, Lucian’s self-defence against an accusation that he misused an Attic term in The 
 (
). See also Simon 
, 
Mistaken Critic Pseudologista
Swain Hellenism and Empire: Language, Classicism 
 (Oxford, 1996), pp. 43–64.
and Power in the Greek World, AD 50–250
Above all, the rhetorical texts that form the basis of this study were part of the living culture of their 
epoch. The definitions and classifications that they contain were not the result of abstract theorizing in 
an antique ivory tower but reflected and shaped actual practices. The 
 in particular, 
Progymnasmata
poised as they are between the stage of reading and speaking, also tell us about habits of reading that 
were deeply ingrained. One particular habit derived from the schools, and also encouraged by the 
surrounding culture, was a deep identification with texts of the past, their authors and the events they 
relate, something that can be seen clearly in the ways in which the Homeric poems are appropriated 
throughout Greek and Roman culture, particularly in the way in which Homer himself is cast as a 
teacher for the present.
  The rhetoricians’ discussions of ekphrasis, the type of writing that ‘places 
    
18
before the eyes’, tell us about the imaginative engagement that was expected. Young readers were 
encouraged not to approach texts as distanced artefacts with a purely critical eye, but to engage with 
them imaginatively, to think themselves into the scenes and to feel as if they were present at the death of 
Patroklos, the making of the Shield of Achilles, or the Athenian disaster in Sicily during the 
Peloponnesian War. This openness of the past to those with the educational attainments to read the texts 
is clear from the uses of classical history in the declamations that were set in the classical past. Whether 
performed by students in schools or by professional sophists these speeches show a creative attitude 
towards classical history. For all the reverence paid to the past, history was not a fixed, inalterable 
object; events could be freely manipulated to serve the needs of the present.
  This openness of history, 
    
19
its availability as matter for manipulation, also underlies the irreverent re-imaginings of the classical 
tradition by an author such as Lucian or the creative re-presentations of moments from myth and tragedy 
in the Philostratean 
, as well as the better-known 
 or 
. One particular 
Heroikos
Eikones
Imagines
manifestation of this attitude towards the past is the habit of reading for the sensation of being plunged 
into the scene or transported back into the moment, which emerges clearly from the rhetoricians’ 
discussions of ekphrasis and is evident in other sources as well. This habit of responding imaginatively 
to the written or spoken word forms a vital part of the background to the teaching and use of ekphrasis in 
rhetorical contexts and deserves to be explored briefly here.
18 See especially ps.-Plutarch, 
; Robert 
, 
On the Life and Poetry of Homer
Lamberton Homer the 
 (Berkeley, 1986) 
Theologian: Neoplatonist Allegorical Reading and the Growth of the Epic Tradition
and Froma 
, ‘Visions and revisions of Homer in the Second Sophistic’, in Simon Goldhill, ed., 
Zeitlin
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:52.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 27-60 | Printed page 7 of 27


── PAGE 21 ──
 
Being Greek under Rome: Cultural Identity, the Second Sophistic and the Development of Empire
(Cambridge, 2001), pp. 195–266.
19 On the manipulation of the past in the declamations, see Thomas 
, ‘Performing history in the 
Schmitz
Second Sophistic’, in M. Zimmermann (ed.), Geschichtsschreibung und politischer Wandel im 3. Jh. N. 
 (Stuttgart, 1999); Ruth 
, ‘Fiction, mimesis and the performance of the Greek past in the 
Chr.
Webb
Second Sophistic’, in David Konstan and Suzanne Saïd (eds), Greeks on Greekness: Viewing the Greek 
 (Cambridge, 2006), pp. 27–46. The most famous ancient statement of this 
Past under the Roman Empire
freedom is in Plutarch’s 
, 27.1.
Life of Solon
Seeing Words
Poets and prose writers, orators and historians were all credited with the ability to ‘place a subject before 
the audience’s eyes’. The many reports of the visual impact of reading texts from classical antiquity 
make it clear that intense imaginative involvement with the scenes described was a common type of 
response to texts. As mentioned above, Homer and Thucydides were the examples most often cited in 
the 
 and their impact on the ancient reader is confirmed in other sources. These ancient 
Progymnasmata
writers often use language that is close to the terminology we find in the technical definitions of 
ekphrasis which is credited with the ability to place ‘before the eyes’ (
) or to make listeners 
hup’opsin
into ‘spectators’ (
). Plutarch, for example, writing in the late first or early second century CE 
theatai
echoes the 
 in his judgement of Thucydides’ ability to make his readers feel as if they 
Progymnasmata
were present at the events he describes: 
Thucydides is always striving for this vividness (
) in his writing, as he eagerly desires to
enargeia
make the listener a spectator, as it were, and to produce in the minds of his readers the feelings of
astonishment and consternation which were experienced by those who witnessed the events.
# γο#ν Θουκυδίδης #ε# τ# λόγ# πρ#ς ταύτην #μιλλ#ται τ#ν #νάργειαν, ο#ον θεατ#ν ποι#σαι τòν
#κροατ#ν κα# τ# γινóμενα περ# το#ς #ρ#ντας #κπληκτικ# κα# ταρακτικ# π#θη το#ς #ναγιν#σκουσιν
#νεργάσασθαι λιχνευóμενος.
As this suggests, the visual impact is not an end in itself but has the further effect of producing an 
emotional impact, involving the listener in the events. The same enthusiasm for the visual impact of 
words is shown by ps.-Longinos in his discussion of the sublime. Citing Herodotos’ account of the 
journey from Elephantine to Meroe (26.2, cf. 9.6), he exclaims: ‘do you see, my friend, how he takes 
your soul and leads it through these places, turning hearing into sight (
)?’ In these 
tēn akoēn opsin poiōn
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:52.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 27-60 | Printed page 8 of 27


── PAGE 22 ──
contexts, the difference between Thucydides the dispassionate reporter and Herodotos the teller of tall 
tales is nowhere to be seen. Instead, both are sources of visual experience which transports the reader 
back to the events described, involving him both imaginatively and emotionally.
Xenophon, too, was renowned for his ability to make his readers feel that they were participating in the 
events of his history. Plutarch attributes the same power to him as to Thucydides, claiming that the long 
account of the battle of Cunaxa in which the younger Cyrus was killed (
, 1.8) all but showed 
Anabasis
the events to the reader, making him feel that it was taking place not in the distant past but before his 
very eyes, and that the reader (
) was filled with emotion and shared in the danger.
  Lucian has 
akroatēs
    
20
a fictional speaker in his 
 attribute the same power to Xenophon’s account of the nobility and 
Eikones
fidelity of Pantheia, wife of Abradates (
, 6.4.2–8), exclaiming that he feels as if he could 
Cyropaideia
actually see and all but (
) hear her arming her husband and sending him out to battle and to 
mononouchi
his death.
  Here the exoticism of the character – a non-Greek woman acting in a manly fashion – 
    
21
intensifies the effect of the passage and the visual pleasure derived from it, as well as serving as a 
reminder of the relentlessly masculine point of view of educated response. The underlying erotic interest 
in the figure of Pantheia emerges clearly from Lucian’s wider context – a debate on the representability 
of the emperor’s mistress – and from Philostratos’ representation of Pantheia’s suicide over Abradates’ 
body (
, 2.9).
Eikones
20 Plutarch, 
, 8.1. Plutarch uses the same formula here as he did of Thucydides, saying that 
Artaxerxes
both authors represent events not as having happened, using the perfect tense (
), but as 
gegenēmena
happening, using the present (
).
gignomena
21 Lucian, 
, 10. On this passage, see Simon 
, ‘The erotic eye: visual stimulation and 
Eikones
Goldhill
cultural conflict’, in Goldhill (ed.), Being Greek under Rome: Cultural Identity, the Second Sophistic 
 (Cambridge, 2001), p. 189.
and the Development of Empire
Philostratos’ treatment brings out a further habit of ancient readers – that of imaginatively elaborating 
upon the scenes presented in texts. Philostratos takes Xenophon as his starting point, citing his source in 
the opening lines of his description. He points out that Xenophon himself did not describe the 
appearance of his heroine, but merely her character (
) (2.9.1) and claims that the painter of the 
ēthos
picture he is describing filled the gaps, painting Pantheia ‘as he deduced her to be from her soul’. The 
painting that Philostratos goes on to describe therefore corresponds to a way of reading in which a verbal 
account of a scene provokes a more detailed visualization, a sensual response. In this case the beauty of 
Pantheia remains tantalizingly elusive; only her posture as she lies over her husband’s body after her 
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:52.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 27-60 | Printed page 9 of 27


── PAGE 23 ──
suicide is described in any specific detail. Otherwise her appearance is described in only the most 
general of terms, implying that for the full experience we must turn to the ever-invisible painting and, by 
implication, to our imaginations.
The best-known and most explicit account of such imaginative supplementation of a text is to be found 
in the compendious guide to the whole rhetorical curriculum by the first-century CE Roman rhetorician 
Quintilian, the 
. Citing a passage from the 
 in which Cicero gave a 
Institutio oratoria
Verrine Orations
brief tableau of Verres with his mistress, Quintilian freely admits that the image that arises in his mind 
when he reads those lines contains details that are not in the text.
  What is more, he presents this 
    
22
response to Cicero’s exemplary 
 not just as normal but as normative, introducing it with the 
enargeia
question ‘is there anyone so incapable of (
) forming images of things that he does not 
tam procul abest
seem to see …?’ The passage and its implications for our understanding of ekphrasis will be discussed 
below, for the moment I would just like to highlight the way in which Quintilian presents his response as 
the norm_ anyone who fails to respond as he does falls short of his readerly ideal. The same confidence 
that imaginative involvement is the educated norm is shown by the Augustan writer Dionysios of 
Halikarnassos in his discussion of the 
 of the fourth-century BCE Attic orator, Lysias. ‘No one’, 
enargeia
he claims, ‘can be so clumsy, difficult to please, or slow-witted (
) 
skaios, dusarestos kai bradus ton noun
that he will not feel that he can see what is being shown (
) actually happening and that he is 
ta dēloumena
conversing with the characters introduced by the orator as if they were present’.
  Like Quintilian, he 
    
23
has only pejorative terms to describe those who fail to respond as he does.
22 
, 8.3.64–5. For further discussion of this passage, see 
.
Quintilian, Institutio oratoria
Chapter 5
23 The Augustan writer, Dionysios of Halikarnassos, 
 7.
Lysias
In his discussion, acutely analysed by Graham Zanker,
  Dionysios claims that Lysias’ 
 made 
    
24
enargeia
the reader feel as if he was in the presence of the characters themselves, even able to converse with them 
(
). This 
 ‘is a certain power to lead the things shown before the senses’ (
homilein
enargeia
dunamis tis 
).
  This definition of 
 is very close to the language 
hupo tas aisthēseis agousa ta dēloumena     
25
enargeia
used to define ekphrasis, which can be literally translated as a speech (
) which leads the thing 
logos
shown vividly before the eyes (
). The difference lies essentially in the 
hup’opsin agon ta dēloumena
mention of ‘the senses’, where the 
 mention only sight, the supreme sense. But, as we 
Progymnasmata
shall see, even the 
 definition assumes that senses other than sight can be excited by the 
Progymnasmata
workings of ekphrasis. Dionysios casts himself not as a distanced spectator but, like those avid readers 
of battle narratives, as a participant who could almost enter into the scene himself and converse with the 
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:52.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 27-60 | Printed page 10 of 27


── PAGE 24 ──
characters. This is partly the result of Lysias’ famed skill at conveying the character of the litigants for 
whom he wrote through the language he gave them to speak, but Dionysios’ language of showing and of 
vision makes clear that the impact was felt as above all a visual one.
24 Graham 
, ‘Enargeia in the ancient criticism of poetry’, 
, 124 (1981): 297–311.
Zanker
RhMus
25 Dionysios of Halikarnassos, 
 7.
Lysias
Readers of tragedy, too, felt drawn into the absent spectacle just by reading the words. Several ancient 
commentators note the vividness of tragic passages.
  Dio Chrysostom in the first century prefaces his 
    
26
discussion of the three versions of 
 by the three great tragedians that were still extant in his 
Philoktetes
day by saying that he ‘was magnificently entertained by the spectacle (
)’ as he read (Or. 52.3). And 
thea
ps.-Longinos describes the sheer emotional force of merely reading certain passages from tragedy. 
Vividness (
) in poetry, he explains, has a shattering impact (
). In the mouths of Greek 
enargeia
ekplēxis
writers of the Roman period these sentiments attest to the constant presence of the classical past. Dio 
imagines himself as a classical producer, staging the three 
 in his head. But, as Froma Zeitlin 
Philoktetes
has shown, it was a response not confined to Greek readers in the case of Homer.
  Nor did the prestige 
    
27
of the past necessarily imply the inadequacy of the present; Dio notes that he was able to compare the 
tragedians’ plays in a way that would not have been possible for a fifth-century Athenian. As has already 
been noted, what is striking about the use of the classics throughout the Roman period is the freedom 
with which the past could be remodelled and reworked. The canonical classical texts, for all the respect 
paid to them, were not seen as untouchable monuments but as sources of material, as spurs to emulation. 
Even at the humble level of the rhetorical schoolroom, boys were taught to undercut the epic heroes, 
finding fault with Achilles, or to argue with the canonical stories.
  The past was exemplary but was 
    
28
part of a common cultural property for all those who were educated, and thus open to endless reworking 
as readers became speakers and writers in their turn.   
29
26 See Roos 
, 
 (Groningen, 1987), esp. pp. 
Meijering Literary and Rhetorical Theories in Greek Scholia
49–52.
27 Zeitlin, ‘Visions and revisions of Homer in the Second Sophistic’.
28 See 
, ‘The 
 as practice’, pp. 301–2.
Webb
Progymnasmata
29 See especially 
, 
; Joy 
, ‘Problems of the 
Whitmarsh Greek Literature and the Roman Empire
Connolly
past in Imperial Greek education’, in Yun Lee 
 (ed.), 
 (Leiden, 2001), 
Too
Greek and Roman Education
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:52.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 27-60 | Printed page 11 of 27


── PAGE 25 ──
pp. 339–72; Schmitz, 
, in an otherwise brilliant analysis of the social function of 
Bildung und Macht
sophistic practices, places too much emphasis on the past as an overwhelming burden that crushed the 
elite.
In her review of reader-response through the ages Jane Tompkins notes this imaginative and emotional 
engagement of ancient readers. She argues that ancient understandings of the relation between text and 
reader were very different from the more analytical approaches of modern reader-response criticism.
  
    
30
In particular, she identifies this involvement as a key difference between ancient criticism and modern 
reader-oriented theories: rather than being concerned primarily with deciphering meaning, ancient critics 
reveal a ‘concept of language as a force acting on the world’.
  What Tompkins’ analysis underlines is 
    
31
the contrast between ancient and modern attitudes to literature and language. Where the modern 
professional reader, the critic, tends to treat his or her subject as an object of analysis, the ancient critic 
stresses the impact of the text. This does not, of course, mean that modern readers do not respond in the 
ways described by ancient critics, but that these types of responses are not valued, theorized and 
articulated in the same way and do not have the same social and cultural significance as, say, an Imperial 
Greek reader’s response to his classical reading.
30 Jane P. Tompkins, ‘The reader in history: the changing shape of literary response’, in Jane P. 
Tompkins (ed.), 
 (Baltimore, 1980).
Reader-response Criticism_ From Formalism to Post-structuralism
31 Tompkins, ‘The reader in history’, pp. 202–3. See also Walter 
, 
Ong Orality and Literacy: The 
 (New York, 1988), 
.
Technologizing of the Word
Chapter 3
Discussions of visual response to words, as Tompkins points out, are one area in which these differences 
emerge particularly acutely. As Ellen Esrock has noted, ‘readerly visuality’ has been neglected as a valid 
response by modern criticism for a variety of reasons.
  Ancient critics, by contrast, speak as if such 
    
32
imaginative responses to words were the norm. In the case of Quintilian and Dionysios, failure to 
respond in this way is even seen as a sign of a much greater moral deficiency. Those who do not respond 
as they do are branded as slow, incapable, difficult to please – the language bristles with terms of 
distance and negation (‘abest’, 
). Such confidence may seem surprising to us. It goes against 
dusarestos
our own culture’s tendency to assume that visualization in response to reading is personal and variable in 
intensity and in content. An average group of twentieth- or twenty-first-century readers will probably 
contain individuals who admit to similar experiences when reading, and others who claim never to ‘see’ 
what they read. Many people assume that their experience of reading is universal and seem genuinely 
surprised to find that others have such different experiences of reading.
  This discrepancy between 
    
33
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:52.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 27-60 | Printed page 12 of 27


── PAGE 26 ──
modern experience and the claims of ancient critics raises the question of whether we should discount 
the claims of ancient critics, or whether the ancient experience of reading was very different from our 
own. When Quintilian and Dionysios both ask ‘who could fail to’ respond in the ways they prescribe 
they open up the possibility that some individuals may not have responded in this way but, at the same 
time, they make clear what they consider the norm to be. The question of whether this represents a real 
difference in response between ancient and modern audiences has been raised by Ann Vasaly and I 
would agree with her suggestion that things 
 different in the ancient world and that ancient 
were
audiences were more consciously attuned to visual effects and did ‘see’ the subject of poems and 
speeches in their mind’s eye.   
34
32 Ellen J. 
, 
 (Baltimore, 1994).
Esrock The Reader’s Eye: Visual Imaging as Reader Response
33 These conclusions are the result of several discussions with small seminar groups composed of 
graduate students and faculty at Princeton University. For a more scientific approach, see Jocelyn Penny 
, 
 
Small Wax Tablets of the Mind: Cognitive Studies of Memory and Literacy in Classical Antiquity
(London, 1997), pp. 130–31 on the work of Michel Denis.
34 Ann Vasaly, 
 (Berkeley, 1993), p. 99. On 
Representations: Images of the World in Ciceronian Oratory
the question of how rhetors could predict the imaginative response of their audience, which Vasaly 
raises here, see 
 and  below. I am leaving aside the question of what the mental experience 
Chapters 4
5
expressed by the claims to ‘see’ actually might have been.
The most striking difference does not perhaps reside in the elusive domain of personal response but in 
the discussions of that response. It is clear that visualization was valued and encouraged within ancient 
education as part of a larger attitude to literature as a force able to penetrate and shape the individual. 
The ability of words to affect the imagination is allied to the idea that they can enter and dwell in the 
soul, leading one authority, according to Plutarch, to suggest giving ear-guards to the young to protect 
them from the wrong sort of language.
  Ancient education clearly placed a value on visualization as a 
    
35
response, and created a vocabulary for the identification and expression of such experiences. It is 
perhaps not surprising that in a culture such as our own, where the attitude to visualization is sceptical 
and the activity considered as an intensely individual matter, reports of experience should vary so 
enormously. In antiquity, by contrast, such visualization could be a very public and shared matter, as we 
shall see. In particular, it is clear that educators expected and encouraged visualization. One area where 
we have clear evidence of training in visualization in ancient schools is that of memory techniques 
which relied on the conscious creation, manipulation and storage of often bizarre images.
  And, as 
    
36
Small points out, in a culture in which the technical difficulties involved in reading and writing made 
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:52.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 27-60 | Printed page 13 of 27


── PAGE 27 ──
memorization a vital skill it is conceivable that people were more prone to use mental images in 
speaking and listening than we are.   
37
35 Plutarch, 
 (
 37F–38B).
On Listening to Lectures Moralia
36 
, 3.16.28–24.30. See also Cicero, 
, 2.354–60; 
Rhetorica ad Herennium
De oratore
Quintilian, Institutio 
, 11.2; the seminal work of Frances 
, 
 (London, 1966); and Small, 
oratoria
Yates The Art of Memory
Wax 
.
Tablets of the Mind
37 See also Agnès 
, 
Rouveret Histoire et imaginaire de la peinture ancienne (Ve s. av. J.-C.–Ier s. ap. J.-
 (Rome, 1989), p. 312.
C.)
In all the examples cited above, the readers who felt that they were in the presence of the subject matter 
were responding to a text from an earlier period. They reveal a concept of classical texts as privileged 
points of access to the experience of the past, which make not just the subjects seem present but the 
authors as well. Again, this was clearly a practice encouraged by their education. A discussion of reading 
aloud by the first-century rhetorician Theon of Alexandria recommends that the student reading the text 
of a classical orator should think himself into the skin of the original speaker – Demosthenes or 
Aeschines, for example – at the original moment of performance. The point of this method acting is to 
involve him totally in the text, emotionally as well as intellectually.
  Such deep identification with the 
    
38
authors of the past continued in schools with the exercise of declamation, in which students argued 
imaginary cases in the persona of a character from the classical past, often an orator like Demosthenes.   
39
38 Theon, 
, section 13 (p. 103). This discussion of reading aloud comes from the end of 
Progymnasmata
the work, which does not survive in the Greek manuscripts and is preserved only in the Armenian 
translation.
39 See Brian 
, 
 (Paris, 1971); Donald 
Reardon Courants littéraires grecs des IIe et IIIe siècles après J.-C.
, 
 (Cambridge, 1983); Schmitz, 
 and ‘Performing History’; 
Russell Greek Declamation
Bildung und Macht
and Webb, ‘Fiction, mimesis and the performance of the Greek past’.
Theon’s recommendations also help to explain the way in which ancient readers of all types of text cast 
themselves as listeners. The term translated ‘reader’ in several of the examples above is 
 – 
akroatēs
‘listener’ – and what is read is often referred to as a 
, with all its implications of live speech. 
logos
Despite the importance of the written word, and its culturally crucial role in preserving the words of past 
eras, the reception of texts remained an essentially aural experience. Active listening was considered as 
an important activity in itself.
  As Theon shows, reading in the school situation meant reading aloud to 
    
40
others, and even solitary readers are known to have pronounced the words out loud, casting themselves 
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:52.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 27-60 | Printed page 14 of 27


── PAGE 28 ──
simultaneously as speaker and audience.
  This effacement of the written medium brings the author, 
    
41
whether poet, historian or orator, into direct proximity, casting the reader as a live audience member, 
like Dio at his private ‘performances’ of tragedy. All readers, even of the deadest of poets, are thus 
assimilated to the audiences of a live performance.
40 See Theon, 
, section 14 and Plutarch, 
 (
 37C–48D).
Progymnasmata
On Listening to Lectures Moralia
41 See William 
, 
 (Cambridge, MA, 1989), pp. 35–6 with further bibliography.
Harris Ancient Literacy
The live audiences of spoken orations were also assumed to respond in the same way to the effective use 
of vivid language. We have fewer testimonies of individual response, but the whole treatment of 
ekphrasis and 
 by ancient rhetoricians is based on the assumption that audiences can be made to 
enargeia
respond imaginatively to a speech, placing themselves in the situation described. Aristotle, in the 
 (1411 b24–5), refers to the ability of certain metaphors to place the image ‘before the eyes’ – 
Rhetoric
 – and makes a distinction between metaphors that evoke an image of motion (
) 
pro ommatōn
energeia
which have this effect, and others, whose image is static, which do not. Quintilian (8.3.62) also makes 
clear that the audience of a judicial speech should have the subject matter ‘displayed to the eyes of the 
mind’, and that he regards success in this as a vital ingredient of the persuasive force of the speech. The 
speech will not have the power that it should (‘debet’) have if the judge believes he is hearing a simple 
narration, rather than having the facts displayed to his mind’s eye, ‘si narrari credit, non exprimi et 
oculis mentis ostendi’.
Quintilian’s purpose in describing his own response to Cicero, or picking out the vivid passages in the 
 is therefore to explain to his own readers how, and why, to work the same effect in their own 
Aeneid
speeches. This practical orientation is shared by most ancient critics – they aim to tell us how to do it, 
not simply to analyse the qualities of a particular writer or passage – making ancient ‘criticism’ a very 
different phenomenon from modern literary criticism. Ancient ‘critics’ were mostly practitioners of 
rhetoric and their primary goal was to show others how to be active practitioners and how to harness the 
power of language for their own ends. Just as the ancient reader was simultaneously speaker and listener 
as he read aloud, educated readers in general expected to become writers and speakers in their turn.   
42
42 Harris, 
, pp. 222–3 notes ‘it may seem that only the exceptionally inarticulate 
Ancient Literacy
members of the Roman upper class refrained from literary composition’. The same can be said of the 
Greek elite in the Roman period, assuming that ‘literary composition’ includes rhetorical compositions.
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:52.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 27-60 | Printed page 15 of 27


── PAGE 29 ──
The elementary exercise of ekphrasis was one means by which students were taught to appreciate the 
ability of words to spark an image in the mind and to master this power for themselves. The discussions 
of ekphrasis can therefore help us to understand how texts were read and what impact the spoken word 
was thought to have upon an audience. They also reveal the strength of the conception of language as a 
power acting upon the world that was current throughout antiquity. As a special use of language to bring 
the subject matter ‘before the eyes’ of the listener, penetrating the mind and acting on the most intimate 
of faculties, ekphrasis and 
 also lie at the intersection of word and image. Any examination of 
enargeia
either has to take account of ancient theories of psychology in which mental images (
 or 
phantasmata
) played a vital part from the classical period onwards. The plain, paradoxical statement we 
phantasiai
find in the 
 and elsewhere that language places a subject ‘before the eyes’ depended on a 
Progymnasmata
body of assumptions about language and its impact on the human mind. In turn, these ideas can point to 
the effects that words actually had on their audiences, as their minds became the locus of interaction 
between word and image.
The ancient discussions of ekphrasis define it as a type of speech that creates immaterial images in the 
mind. The speaker of a successful ekphrasis is therefore a metaphorical painter, the result of his words is 
a metaphorical painting and this analogy emerges at certain points in the discussions. The Byzantine 
scholar John Sardianos, for example, commenting on the ancient rhetorical texts that were still in use in 
the Greek Middle Ages, points out that ekphrasis works by ‘imitating the painters’ art’.
  How this 
    
43
paradoxical feat could be accomplished, and why it was considered useful for students of rhetoric, will 
be the subject of the next chapters. Before addressing these questions, I would like to return to the 
modern definition to trace the processes by which the definition took on its familiar modern contours. I 
believe it is particularly important to try to identify the various ideas and interests that gave rise to the 
modern definition since the intellectual climate in which it developed was radically different from the 
world of the ancient rhetors.
43 Sardianos, 
, p. 217, ll. 3–5.
Commentarium
Ancient and Modern Ekphrasis
As outlined above, the basic modern definition grew out of the ancient one by a double process of 
restriction and expansion, resulting in a concept that is related to but radically different from the ancient 
meaning that is the subject of this book. First, attention was focused on those ekphraseis that described 
paintings, sculptures and monuments, leading to an association of the term with that restricted range of 
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:52.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 27-60 | Printed page 16 of 27


── PAGE 30 ──
subject matter; then the term’s frame of reference was expanded to include other texts, both ancient and 
modern, referring to the arts. The end result of this process was a genre of writing about art that is often 
considered to be best exemplified by poetic examples.
  In antiquity, by contrast, ekphrasis was part of 
    
44
a rhetorical training. The authors of the 
 adduced examples from poetry, like the Shield 
Progymnasmata
of Achilles or descriptions of characters from epic, but they were part of a system in which the reading 
of poetry was largely subordinated to the study of rhetoric. It is ironic that an ancient rhetorical 
technique should have metamorphosed into an essentially poetic phenomenon, but this contrast reveals 
one of the key differences between the culture of Roman period and modern aesthetic interests.
44 Murray 
, 
 (Baltimore, 1992) and James A.W. 
Krieger Ekphrasis: The Illusion of the Natural Sign
, 
 (Chicago, 1993) 
Heffernan Museum of Words: The Poetics of Ekphrasis from Homer to Ashbery
concentrate on examples drawn from poetry; John 
, 
Hollander The Gazer’s Spirit: Poems Speaking to 
 (Chicago and London, 1995) defines the subject of his work as ‘actual ecphrasis’ – 
Silent Works of Art
that is, poems written in response to real works of art (p. 4).
This dual process of restriction and expansion that resulted in the modern definition was motivated by 
diverse intellectual currents: interest in the aesthetic problems of describing the arts in words and 
archaeological curiosity and controversy about the realities lying behind Philostratos’ 
 and other 
Eikones
ekphraseis. Although this process culminated in the mid twentieth century, before which time the term 
ekphrasis was mainly restricted to studies of Imperial literature and often relegated to obscure footnotes, 
it was the result of centuries of interest in verbal accounts of the arts.
Two French studies of Lucian’s works show the general state of affairs in the earlier part of the twentieth 
century. It was their interest in aesthetic questions that led Henri Piot and Jacques Bompaire to focus on 
the special category of ekphraseis of works of art while acknowledging that the sense of the term was far 
wider in antiquity. Discussing the ancient definition, Piot points out that any ekphrasis (of whatever type 
of subject) in some sense rivals the graphic arts and is thus an example of the art of literature attempting 
to appropriate to itself the function of another art.
  
, writing in the 1950s, also acknowledged 
    
45 Bompaire
that ekphrasis in Lucian’s day was not conceived as a genre dedicated to the work of art but explained 
that he chose to focus on this type of ekphrasis simply because it was the most intrinsically interesting, 
showing as it did the interaction between literature, graphic arts and architecture.   
46
45 Henri 
, 
 (Rennes, 1914), p. 
Piot Les Procédés littéraires de la IIe Sophistique chez Lucien: l’ecphrasis
22: ‘L’objet de l’ecphrasis, dit Hermogène “est de mettre sous les yeux la chose qu’on veut montrer”. 
Elle a des rapports très étroits avec les transpositions d’art en honneur chez les Alexandrins’ [The aim of 
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:52.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 27-60 | Printed page 17 of 27


── PAGE 31 ──
ecphrasis, according to Hermogenes, ‘is to place the subject which one wishes to display before the 
eyes’. It is closely related to the ‘transpositions d’art’ beloved of the Alexandrians].
46 Jacques Bompaire, 
 (Paris, 1958), p. 707: ‘le sens le plus 
Lucien écrivain: imitation et création
intéressant est celui qui fait de l’ecphrasis d’oeuvre d’art, sc. tableau, édifice, l’ecphrasis par excellence 
… la littérature se nourrit d’art’ [The most interesting meaning is the one which treats ecphrasis of 
works of art (paintings, buildings) as ecphrasis par excellence … literature is nourished by art]. Cf. Louis 
, 
 (Paris, 1906), p. 150 
Méridier L’Influence de la Seconde Sophistique sur l’œuvre de Gregoire de Nysse
(on Gregory of Nyssa).
The precise language used by these two scholars suggests that their interest in ekphraseis of works of art 
was stimulated as much by contemporary aesthetic concerns as by the popularity of works of art and 
architecture as subjects for ekphrasis among Lucian and his contemporaries. This is particularly clear in 
Piot’s use of the phrase ‘transpositions d’art’ which recurs frequently in discussions of ekphrasis in its 
restricted sense from the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. The phrase was coined by 
Huysmans in the early 1880s to express the way in which Odilon Redon seemed to capture in his 
paintings the atmosphere of Poe and Baudelaire, but it also summed up the enterprise of French decadent 
poets such as Théophile Gautier who attempted to translate the sensual beauty of art into words. For 
Gautier, doyen of the doctrine of ‘l’art pour l’art’, the verbal and graphic artist shared the task of 
representing reality through the workings of art.   
47
47 Gautier’s own writing has been described as a ‘transposition écrite du tableau’. See Georges Matoré, 
Le Vocabulaire de la prose littéraire de 1835 à 1845: Théophile Gautier et ses premières oeuvres en 
 (Geneva and Lille, 1951), p. 142. In his poem ‘L’Art’, Gautier presents verbal and sculptural 
prose
artistry as equivalent: ‘Oui, l’oeuvre sort plus belle / D’une forme au travail / Rebelle / Vers, marbre, 
onyx, émail’ [Yes, more beautiful pieces emerge from forms that resist being worked: verse, marble, 
onyx, enamel].
The part played by such aesthetic doctrines in the shaping of the modern conception of ekphrasis is 
shown clearly in the studies of Philostratos by two earlier French scholars, the art historian Edouard 
Bertrand and the philologist 
. Both attempted to move the study 
Auguste Bougot, both published in 1881
of the 
 away from the question of whether the text was archaeologically accurate or not, which 
Eikones
had dominated the scholarship up until then, particularly in Germany. Bertrand and Bougot attempted 
instead to understand the cultural background to Philostratos – though Bertrand’s depiction of the 
Second Sophistic seems to owe a great deal to late-nineteenth-century Parisian culture – and identified 
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:52.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 27-60 | Printed page 18 of 27


── PAGE 32 ──
Philostratos as an ‘art critic’ whose descriptions showed how art was perceived, an approach that 
anticipated twentieth-century readings of the text.   
48
48 See, for example, Jaś 
, 
Elsner Art and the Roman Viewer: The Transformation of Art from the Pagan 
 (Cambridge, 1995).
World to Christianity
Bertrand and Bougot also took the step of placing the text within a tradition of poetic descriptions of 
works of art, a type of text which resonated with contemporary developments in French literature and 
arts. Both, moreover, borrowed the term ‘ekphrasis’ as a label for this tradition, although the ways in 
which they introduced it into their discussions suggest that they were far from confident about its usage. 
Bertrand enigmatically refers to the descriptions of works of art in authors of the Roman period such as 
Catullus, Virgil, Statius, Martial, Apuleius and Lucian as belonging to ‘a fashionable genre which had its 
own name’.
  The name turns out to be ‘ekphrasis’. But Bertrand is curiously coy about saying so. He 
    
49
hides the word itself in a footnote and leaves it in Greek letters. Most importantly, however, he implies 
that Philostratos consciously saw himself as writing within this tradition. In a passage bordering on 
historical fiction, Bertrand imagines Philostratos as an ambitious writer, desperate to surpass these 
predecessors, who suddenly one day had the idea of creating the new genre of art criticism.
  Bougot, 
    
50
whose translation and substantial introduction appeared just before Bertrand’s study, also brought the 
term ekphrasis into his discussion rather ambiguously, entitling one section ‘L’ecphrasis ou description 
des oeuvres d’art’, leaving open the question of whether ekphrasis is to be understood as equivalent to 
description generally, or to descriptions of works of art in particular. He took the constitution of the 
genre of ekphrasis one step further, however, by extending its frame of reference backwards in time to 
include descriptions of works of art in Homer and tragedy.   
51
49 Bertrand, 
, p. 49: ‘c’est un genre en faveur qui a un nom particulier’.
Un critique d’art dans l’antiquité
50 Bertrand, 
, pp. 53–4: ‘Tourmenté de la même ambition, Philostrate s’
Un critique d’art dans l’antiquité
était aussi créé un style singulier composé d’archaïsmes et de néologismes. Mais il eut un jour une 
pensée neuve, et ce jour là il créa un genre qui lui survécut et suscita des imitateurs: il créa la critique d’
art’ [Tormented by the same ambition, Philostratos also developed a unique style combining archaisms 
and neologisms. But one day he had a new idea and on that day he created a genre which outlived him 
and inspired imitators: he created art criticism]. The use of unusual vocabulary which Bertrand 
underlines here was also a characteristic of Parnassian poetics.
51 Bougot, 
, pp. 1 and 171.
Philostrate l’Ancien
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:52.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 27-60 | Printed page 19 of 27


── PAGE 33 ──
All these studies illustrate the process by which ekphraseis of works from the Second Sophistic were 
gradually detached from their wider rhetorical background and from the broader definition of ekphrasis 
current in antiquity and placed within a different context: the description of works of art generally. Just 
as literary scholars’ interest in the enterprise of describing the work of art in words led them to detach 
ekphraseis of works of art from ekphrasis in general and place it in its new context, archaeologists 
followed precisely the same process in their study of texts like the 
 and the Late Antique and 
Eikones
Byzantine ekphraseis of works of art and architecture. They isolated these texts from their rhetorical 
background, treating them as precious sources of information about lost monuments.   
52
52 Antonio 
, ‘Le #κφράσεις nella letteratura bizantina e i loro rapporti con l’arte figurata’, in 
Muñoz
 (Prague, 1926) focused attention onto 
Recueil d’études dédiées à la mémoire de N.P. Kondakov
Byzantine ekphraseis of monuments and icons as a source of information on lost works. As Henry 
, 
 (Princeton, 1981), pp. 22–3 has noted, the concentration on 
Maguire Art and Eloquence in Byzantium
ekphraseis of monuments and works of art for their archaeological information has had the effect of 
distracting attention from other types of ekphrasis.
The major step in this direction was, of course, the great survey of descriptions of art and architecture in 
classical literature that forms the introduction to Paul Friedländer’s 1912 edition of two Late Antique 
ekphraseis of monuments: Paul the Silentiary’s ekphrasis of Hagia Sophia and John of Gaza’s ekphrasis 
of a bath building. Friedländer’s survey was to become the ultimate definition of the genre of ekphrasis 
(in the sense of descriptions of works of art and architecture) in ancient literature and includes all the 
standard examples: the Shield of Achilles, Lucian’s Calumny of Apelles, Euripides’ 
, Greek and 
Ion
Latin epigrams. But while Friedländer’s introduction was the most thorough review of ancient literary 
descriptions of works of art, he did not take the further step of defining these texts as members of a 
single genre, still less of reifying that genre by giving it a name. Instead, he was extremely careful to use 
the term ‘ekphrasis’ only when discussing texts like the Philostratean 
 or Byzantine ekphraseis of 
Eikones
works of art which fell into the intersection of the ancient and modern definitions or which were 
discussed as examples of ekphrasis in antiquity.   
53
53 Friedländer, 
, pp. 84–5. In his 1939 edition of Prokopios of 
Johannes von Gaza und Paulus Silentiarius
Gaza’s ekphrasis of a painting, Friedländer still used the term länder still used the term 
‘Bildbeschreibung’.
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:52.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 27-60 | Printed page 20 of 27


── PAGE 34 ──
The reputation that Friedländer’s survey has acquired as the first definitive survey of ekphrasis is 
particularly ironic in the light of his own deep concern about the correct use of terminology. In 
particular, he criticizes those anonymous scholars who have seized on the term ‘ekphrasis’ to explain 
texts like those of the Philostratoi. The rhetorical exercise, Friedländer explains, cannot in itself explain 
the existence of such texts; instead they should be seen against the wider background of the tradition of 
describing works of art and architecture in ancient literature.
  His survey makes an important point, 
    
54
that clearly there was such a tradition and that texts discussing or describing the arts are to be found in 
many classical genres from epic to epigram, from historiography to the magpie-like miscellany of a 
Pliny. But he does not present these passages as a genre and sees them as distinct from the ancient 
practice of ekphrasis.
54 Friedländer, 
, p. 83: ‘Man pflegt heut literargeschichtliche 
Johannes von Gaza und Paulus Silentiarius
Fragen, wie sie uns beschäftigen, mit dem Schlagwort “rhetorische Ekphrasis” mehr scheinbar als 
wirklich zu beantworten und glaubt, dass hier die ‘Rhetorenschule’ schöpferisch gewesen sei.’ See also 
his comments on descriptions of works of art in the novel: 
, pp. 47 and 54–5.
ibid.
In collecting together these passages Friedländer, like Bertrand and Bougot, was following the lead of 
earlier scholarship on Philostratos: in 1709 Gottfried Olearius had included in his edition of the 
Philostratoi and Kallistratos a discussion of the works’ origin and speculated that all three of the later 
writers had found a common inspiration in the Homeric Shield of Achilles.
  Another German editor of 
    
55
Philostratos and Kallistratos, Jacobs (who published his edition jointly with Welcker in 1825), had taken 
this exploration of the origin of the 
 one step further, noting the poetic precedents and citing not 
Eikones
just Homer but also Hesiod, Theocritus, Apollonius Rhodius, Moschus, Quintus Smyrnaeus, Catullus, 
Virgil, Ovid and Statius. However, he did not take the further step of naming these descriptive passages 
‘ekphraseis’ (the term is used, in Greek, in the general sense of ‘description’) or of claiming that they 
constituted a genre.
  But the nucleus of the modern genre is here, as it would later be in a footnote by 
    
56
Erwin 
 who, in his study of the Greek novels, first published in 1876, suggested that the roots of 
Rohde
‘rhetorisch-sophistischen ekphraseis’ of paintings and statues from the Second Sophistic lay in the 
earlier poetic tradition.
  This note, too, mentions many of the standard examples of what would now 
    
57
be called ‘ekphrasis’, from the Shield of Achilles, through the Cloak of Jason in the 
 and 
Argonautica
Moschus’ 
, to Virgil, Catullus and Nonnus.
Europa
55 Philostratos, 
, ed. Olearius (Leipzig, 1709), p. 760. The decision to group the Elder and the 
Opera
Younger Philostratos’ 
 together with Kallistratos’ ekphraseis of statues in a single volume is in 
Eikones
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:52.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 27-60 | Printed page 21 of 27


── PAGE 35 ──
itself a significant step that divorces the 
 from the Philostratean corpus to place it in a context of 
Eikones
descriptions works of art, rather than a wider rhetorical context.
56 Interestingly, Jacobs notes in his introduction that he became interested in the 
 while working 
Eikones
on Greek epigrams about art works some 30 years earlier. He therefore approaches the text from an 
archaeological standpoint reflected in his use of the term ekphrasis as the equivalent of description as he 
understood it, i.e. an accurate account of the appearance of an object. This leads him to the ironic claim 
(pp. xvi–xvii) that Philostratos failed to produce proper ekphraseis and succumbed instead to the 
temptations of rhetorical embellishment.
57 Erwin Rohde, 
 (Leipzig, 1900), p. 360n.
Der griechische Roman und seine Vorläufer
Like Friedländer’s survey all these footnotes and comments served to draw attention to the phenomenon 
of describing works of art in antiquity but without applying the label ekphrasis to them. The term floats 
in the vicinity of these discussions, but, unlike Bertrand and Bougot, the authors do not apply it as a 
unifying label for writing on art nor do they suggest that they are discussing or defining a genre. This 
explains why Schissel von Fleschenberg, in his study of the use of descriptions of works of art in the 
novel published in 1913, does not use it but invents instead the term ‘Bildeinsatz’ (‘inset painting’) to 
designate what would now almost automatically be termed ekphrasis.
  What Schissel von 
    
58
Fleschenberg’s article does show is the growing interest in this technique as a literary phenomenon. In 
the same way, Bertrand and Bougot were inspired by contemporary cultural debates in their refreshing 
attempt to wrest the 
 from the stale debates about the accuracy and reliability of the descriptions 
Eikones
and to show that Philostratos’ enterprise was something different: a reflection of the place of art in 
society and, in Bertrand’s account, the birth of art criticism.
58 In a letter to Friedländler written in 1913 and now in the Paul Friedländer Collection, UCLA Special 
Collections (Box 1). In the letter Schissel uses the term ‘Bildbeschreibung’ but not ekphrasis. Schissel 
von Fleschenberg criticizes his historicist approach as old-fashioned (as well as taking great pleasure in 
pointing out various omissions of primary and secondary sources). In his article Schissel justified his 
deliberate omission of any enquiry into the origins of the 
 by distinguishing his type of 
Bildeinsatz
literary studies (
) from the (implicitly inferior) enterprise of literary history.
Literaturwissenschaft
As we have already seen, a parallel interest in Imperial ekphraseis of paintings, sculpture and buildings 
as sources of information on lost works also contributed to the process. However, almost all of the 
classical and medieval studies acknowledge the ancient sense of the term and often take their starting 
points from ekphraseis of works of art. The revolutionary step of defining ekphrasis as an essentially 
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:52.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 27-60 | Printed page 22 of 27


── PAGE 36 ──
 genre, totally divorced from the rhetorical form of ekphrasis, was taken by Leo Spitzer in his 
poetic
famous essay on Keats’ ‘Ode on a Grecian Urn’, first published in 1955. Here, Spitzer identifies the ode 
as part of a long tradition called ekphrasis: 
it [the ode] belongs to the genre, known to Occidental literature from Homer and Theocritus to the
Parnassians and Rilke, of the 
, the poetic description of a pictorial or sculptural work of art,
ekphrasis
which description implies, in the words of Théophile Gautier, ‘une transposition d’art,’ the
reproduction, through the medium of words, of sensuously perceptible 
 (‘ut pictura
objets d’art
poesis’).   
59
59 Leo 
, ‘The “Ode on a Grecian Urn,” or content vs. metagrammar’, in 
Spitzer
Essays on English and
, ed. Anna Hatcher (Princeton, 1962), p. 72.
American Literature
Spitzer does not give any source for his definition, perhaps not surprisingly, and his calm assurance 
masks the innovation he was making. His mention of the Parnassians and Gautier, to whom he 
erroneously attributes the phrase ‘transposition d’art’, do, however, reveal the intellectual currents which 
shaped his interest in and conception of ekphrasis.
  A further parallel with Bertrand’s and Bougot’s 
    
60
studies of Philostratos in particular emerges later on in Spitzer’s discussion of Keats’ ode when he insists 
on the poem’s function as a representation of the poet’s response to the sight of the urn. Interestingly, he 
presents this as a particular development of ekphrasis, which he appears to conceive of as simply a form 
of objective description: ‘The ekphrasis, the description of an 
 by the medium of the word, has 
objet d’art
here developed into an account of an exemplary experience felt by the poet confronted with an ancient 
work of art …’   
61
60 Spitzer had previously published articles on descriptions of works of art in the poetry of Mörike, 
‘Wiederum Mörikes Gedicht “Auf eine Lampe”’, 
, 9 (1951): 203–25 and Garcilaso de la Vega, 
Trivium
‘Garcilaso, Third Eclogue, Lines 265–271’, 
, 20 (1952): 243–8. The term ekphrasis 
Hispanic Review
appears once, buried in a footnote, in the latter of these. Given Spitzer’s background in French and 
classics and his interest in the description of works of art, it does seem likely that he knew the work of 
Bertrand, Bougot and Piot, not to mention the 
. I am grateful to Alejandro 
Oxford Classical Dictionary
Coroleu for drawing my attention to the article on Garcilaso.
61 Spitzer, ‘The “Ode on a Grecian Urn”’, p. 89.
Spitzer’s achievement was to create a concept of a poetic genre that triumphantly transcended both time 
and place. Homer, Theokritos, the Parnassian poets and Rilke all partook of the same essence. The way 
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:52.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 27-60 | Printed page 23 of 27


── PAGE 37 ──
in which he introduces the first of the quotations gives the unsuspecting reader no clue that he has just 
invented a genre, albeit one that had long been waiting to happen. He presents it as ‘an obvious generic 
statement’, a straightforward starting point for any study of Keats’ ode. His method is to separate what 
might count as straightforward description (‘What exactly … Keats [has] seen (or chosen to show us) 
depicted on urn he is describing’ (pp. 72–3)) from ‘the symbolic or metaphysical inferences drawn by 
the poet from the visual elements he has apperceived’ (p. 73). The statement that Keats’ poem is about 
an art object and that other such poems have existed from antiquity onwards is, one would think, 
incontrovertible, and gives Spitzer the basis for a brilliant analysis. But such a straightforward statement 
hides the revolutionary nature of his claim for ekphrasis and its implications of unity of poetic purpose 
across time and space. What is a useful concept and a useful set of 
 for the critic embarking 
comparanda
upon a reading of the ‘Ode on a Grecian Urn’ is presented as literary-historical fact.
One can speculate on the attraction of such continuity in Western culture for a refugee scholar like 
Spitzer.
  But the effect of his definition, taken in isolation, was to obliterate cultural distinctions and to 
    
62
remove rhetoric, particularly the rhetorical culture of the Roman period, entirely from the picture. The 
term ekphrasis is restricted not only to ‘descriptions of works of art’ but to 
 descriptions of works 
poetic
of art and simultaneously expanded to include all periods of ‘Western culture’. The rest is history. 
Spitzer’s constitution of the new genre of ekphrasis catapulted the word out of the specialized domain of 
classical and archaeology into the world of English and Comparative Literature, sparking essays, books, 
colloquia, redefinitions and counter-definitions.
  The popularity and influence of Spitzer’s definition 
    
63
show more clearly than ever that his new genre satisfied an intellectual need. Descriptions of works of 
art as a group had attracted interest since the Renaissance.
  This interest emerges in the grouping of 
    
64
Philostratos’ 
 with Kallistratos’ 
 by Olearius, in the archaeological debates about 
Eikones
Ekphraseis
whether such descriptions were records or ‘mere rhetoric’, in the fascination with the ways in which one 
art represents another and the autonomy of the arts that this suggests. Spitzer’s ekphrasis was a genre, or 
mode, in search of a label. The vogue for New Criticism meant that Spitzer’s definition fell on 
particularly fertile ground, as witnessed by Murray 
’s study of Keats’ ode and of his conception 
Krieger
of ekphrasis.   
65
62 Spitzer himself makes an autobiographical comment in the article, describing himself as ‘a European 
born scholar, nurtured in a centuries-old tradition of both scholarly and aesthetic interpretation, 
especially in the classical and the French fields’, as he laments the divide between ‘scholars’ and ‘critics’ 
in US English departments: ‘The “Ode on a Grecian Urn”’, p. 68.
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:52.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 27-60 | Printed page 24 of 27


── PAGE 38 ──
63 See, for example, James A.W. 
, ‘Ekphrasis and representation’, 
, 22 
Heffernan
New Literary History
(1991): 297–316 and 
. Jean Hagstrum, 
Museum of Words
The Sister Arts: The Tradition of Literary 
 (Chicago, 1958), p. 18, n. 34 proposed his own 
Pictorialism and English Poetry from Dryden to Gray
definition: ‘I use the noun “ecphrasis” and the adjective “ecphrastic” in a more limited sense to refer that 
special quality of giving voice and language to the otherwise mute art object.’ Hagstrum is keen to 
provide ancient justification for his idiosyncratic usage, claiming that ‘my usage is etymologically sound 
since the Greek noun and adjective come from 
, which means “to speak out”, “to tell in full”.’ 
ekphrazein
On the function of the ‘ek’ in ekphrasis, see below, 
 (p. 74).
Chapter 3
64 One of the first to conceive of literary descriptions of works of art as a coherent group was Erasmus. 
His rhetorical treatise, 
 (II, 202), includes a list of passages describing paintings and sculptures: 
De Copia
‘Statuarum item_ qualis est in epistolis Plinianis signi senilis; tabularum et imaginum_ qualis est apud 
Lucianum Hercules Gallicus, apud Philostratum varia picturarum argumenta’; to this category belong 
also Ovid’s description of Arachne’s tapestry in 
, the Homeric Shield of Achilles and its 
Metamorphoses
Virgilian descendent, the Shield of Aeneas, ending ‘ad haec navis, vestis, παvoπλίας, machinae, currus, 
Colossi, pyramidis, aut si quid est aliud rerum consimilium, quarum descriptio delectet.’
65 Murray Krieger, 
 (Baltimore, 1992).
Ekphrasis: The Illusion of the Natural Sign
Since the mid twentieth century, ekphrasis, generally understood as the description of works of art, 
usually in poetry, has become a familiar term, though the basic definition has given rise to many 
different approaches, which it is impossible to survey here. One such development that has been fruitful 
in the study of classical literature is the reading of descriptions of works of art as metapoetic 
commentaries on the literary work within which they are found.
  Such developments reflect the 
    
66
‘linguistic turn’ in twentieth-century approaches to literature, a development that freed the study of 
description in particular from the expectation that language should depict reality and underlined the 
problems involved in verbal representation.   
67
66 See, for example, Perrine 
, 
Galand-Hallyn Le Reflet des fleurs: description et métalangage poétique d’
 (Geneva, 1994) and Andrew 
, 
Homère à Erasme
Becker The Shield of Achilles and the Poetics of 
 (Lanham, 1995).
Ekphrasis
67 See, in particular, the essays collected in Roland 
 et al., 
 (Paris, 1982) and 
Barthes
Littérature et réalité
in 
, 61 (1981).
Yale French Studies
This same development made possible a fresh appreciation of rhetorical texts of all kinds, in particular 
the rhetoric of the Second Sophistic, including its ekphraseis of works of art. However, the resulting 
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:52.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 27-60 | Printed page 25 of 27


── PAGE 39 ──
renaissance of interest in the Second Sophistic and later rhetoric has tended to focus on those texts that 
most resemble modern literature, such as dialogues and the novel, and, in the case of ekphrasis, a certain 
subgroup of ekphraseis of works of art (such as Philostratos’ 
) has come to stand as emblematic 
Eikones
of the whole of ekphrasis. The fact that this move misrepresents the category of ekphrasis as it was 
understood in antiquity does not in any way undermine the interpretative value of individual studies of 
individual literary texts. But, if we are interested in the wider intellectual and cultural contexts in which 
these texts were read, heard and composed, it is misleading to assume that ancient categories and 
assumptions about language were identical to our own. Of course, those ancient categories are 
irrecoverable in their entirety but there is still a large amount of information that is still to be exploited in 
sources such as scholia and rhetorical handbooks.
  This study aims to elucidate the ancient category of 
    
68
ekphrasis and the assumptions that underlay it by appealing to a wider range of rhetorical texts and 
discovering what could be called the poetics of ancient rhetorical theory.
68 Two notable examples of such an approach are Roos 
, 
Meijering Literary and Rhetorical Theories in 
 (Groningen, 1987) and Michel 
, 
Greek Scholia
Patillon La Théorie du discours chez Hermogène le 
 (Paris, 1988).
Rhéteur: essai sur les structures linguistiques de la rhétorique ancienne
It is important to note, too, the radical differences between the interests and assumptions that drove the 
modern structuralist and linguistic approaches to literature and the ancient rhetorical theories that are the 
subject of this book. The ancient rhetoricians assume a live audience upon whom the speaker can exert 
an impact and their orientation is first and foremost practical (despite the appearance of obsessive 
categorization and subcategorization that often strikes the modern reader on first encountering their 
work). It is not, therefore, surprising if their ways of approaching discourses of all kinds are different 
from those of a modern critic whose task is to analyze a written text. We have already seen the emphasis 
placed by ancient readers on their imaginative and emotional responses to certain passages, precisely the 
type of response that is largely ignored by structuralist and post-structuralist approaches. It is remarkable 
that even reception theory privileges the hermeneutic mode of reading which casts the reader as 
interpreter engaged in a patient act of decoding. Though such approaches to texts – and images – 
certainly did exist in antiquity, they were not at the heart of the ancient phenomenon of ekphrasis.
Conclusion
The purpose of this excursus into the modern redefinition of the term ekphrasis is to show the 
intellectual interests that shaped it. Though Spitzer, for example, presents his category of ekphrasis as a 
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:52.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 27-60 | Printed page 26 of 27


── PAGE 40 ──
transcendent phenomenon that has existed throughout literary history, it is very much contingent on a 
particular time and place and on a particular narrative of ‘Occidental Literature’ which leaps blithely 
over those aspects of ancient culture that are less readily assimilable to modern ideas of literature than 
are Homeric epic or Theocritean pastoral poetry. The ancient conception of ekphrasis is just as much a 
product of its time and its culture.
Clarity is vital precisely because of the ultimate closeness of Spitzer’s definition of ekphrasis to the 
ancient one. We have seen how the isolation of ancient ekphraseis of works of art from ekphraseis in 
general was accompanied by the gathering together of poetic precedents for the description of works of 
art from various genres, leading to this collection of illustrative examples being understood as a genre in 
itself. There is therefore a genealogical connection between the ancient and modern definitions, a 
connection reflected in the primacy of the visual in both. But the different role of the visual is key to the 
profound differences between the conceptions underlying the two definitions. For the modern definition 
the visual is a quality of the referent, which in some definitions is already a representation of reality. For 
the ancient rhetoricians the impact of ekphrasis is visual; it is a translation of the perceptible which 
mimics the effect of perception, making the listener seem to see. The impact on the audience is powerful 
and immediate – as Plutarch claims for Xenophon and Thucydides; it is a psychological effect, and, as I 
shall argue below, what is imitated in ekphrasis and 
 is not reality, but the perception of reality. 
enargeia
The word does not seek to represent, but to have an effect in the audience’s mind that mimics the act of 
seeing.
As moderns we cannot hope to understand something like ekphrasis entirely from an ancient 
perspective: the sources at our disposal represent a fraction of the definitions and paradigms available to 
the ancient rhetorician.
  I am fully aware that what I am proposing in the following chapters is another 
    
69
modern interpretation of ancient ekphrasis. However, it is one that is based on a more comprehensive 
study of the ancient theoretical sources than has been undertaken before and therein, I hope, lies its main 
interest.
69 See the remarks of Don 
 in his essay ‘Narrate and describe: the problem of ekphrasis’, 
, 81 
Fowler
JRS
(1991): 25–35.
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:47:52.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 27-60 | Printed page 27 of 27


── PAGE 41 ──
4 Enargeia: Making Absent Things Present
DOI: 10.4324/9781315578996-4
Introduction: Ekphrasis and Enargeia
The surviving Greek sources on ekphrasis show how it was taught at the elementary stage of rhetorical 
training and, as we will see in 
, help us to understand how ekphrasis could be put to use in the 
Chapter 6
context of a larger speech. The basic information they provide about the use of ekphrasis in rhetorical 
contexts is invaluable, but they largely leave aside the reasons 
 an orator might need to use this 
why
technique. To find explicit discussion of these questions we need to turn to a Latin source, the Institutio 
 of Quintilian, Theon’s contemporary. Quintilian covers the whole range of the rhetorical 
oratoria
curriculum, reflecting the traditional teaching of Roman schools, theoretical sources and his own 
extensive experience of forensic pleading. He was clearly familiar with Greek rhetorical theory and 
many details of his teaching can be directly compared with Greek examples.
  What Quintilian adds in 
    
1
particular is the practical, personal perspective of the seasoned speaker, telling us how vivid language 
could actually be used, and what he knew its effect on an audience could be.
1 On Quintilian’s sources, see Jean 
, 
 (2 vols, Amsterdam, 1967). For a 
Cousin Etudes sur Quintilien
direct comparison with Theon, see Italo 
, 
Lana Quintiliano, Il ‘Sublime’ e gli ‘Esercizi preparatori’ di 
 (Turin, 1951). On the uses 
Elio Teone: ricerca sulle fonti grece di Quintiliano e sull’autor ‘Del Sublime’
of 
 in Cicero, see Ann 
, 
 
enargeia
Vasaly Representations: Images of the World in Ciceronian Oratory
(Berkeley, 1993) and Beth 
, ‘Towards a theory of vivid description as practised in Cicero’s 
Innocenti
’, 
, 12 (1994): 355–81.
Verrine Orations
Rhetorica
The connections between Quintilian’s discussion of early rhetorical education and the Greek 
 have been explored, particularly by Italo Lana.
  Several of the elementary exercises he 
Progymnasmata
    
2
mentions have direct equivalents in the 
, though nothing corresponds directly to the 
Progymnasmata
exercise of ekphrasis. (An earlier Latin treatise, once ascribed to Cicero, the 
, 
Rhetorica ad Herennium
devotes a section to ‘descriptio’, which does correspond in many ways to the Greek treatments of 
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:48:03.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 122-147 | Printed page 1 of 21


── PAGE 42 ──
ekphrasis, but this is presented as a technique to be used in a finished speech, not as an exercise.)
  In 
    
3
Quintilian’s handbook, something corresponding to the Greek ekphrasis is to be found but not in his 
discussion of elementary exercises; nor is ekphrasis identifiable with any single figure or trope. Instead, 
it is to be found in his various treatments of 
 (Latin ‘evidentia’), the quality of language that 
enargeia
appeals to the audience’s imagination, in precisely the way that ekphrasis is said to do, and which is 
central to the definition of ekphrasis.
2 Lana, 
 and Ian 
, 
Quintiliano, Il ‘Sublime’ e gli ‘Esercizi preparatori’ di Elio Teone
Henderson
‘Quintilian and the 
’, 
, 37 (1991): 82–99.
Progymnasmata
Antike und Abendland
3 
, 4.39.51. For further discussion, see below.
Rhetorica ad Herennium
Enargeia in Quintilian
We saw in the previous chapter how Quintilian’s distinction between a plain statement of facts 
(‘narratio’) and a narration with 
 corresponds to Nikolaos’ distinction between 
 and 
enargeia
diēgēsis
ekphrasis. In Book 4 of the 
, Quintilian includes some remarks on this quality of 
Institutio oratoria
vividness in his treatment of the statement of facts (‘narratio’). This placement suggests that, rather like 
the authors of the lost Greek 
 mentioned by ps.-Hermogenes, he considered 
 as 
Progymnasmata
enargeia
a quality to be added to various types of discourse. In addition to this brief mention of 
 under 
enargeia
the heading of narration, Quintilian discusses it at two further main points in his treatise: as a means of 
arousing the emotions (Book 6) and as a figure of speech which has the particularly vital role of ensuring 
that the listener is swayed by the speaker’s case (Book 8.3.67–9, cited above). These passages are of 
vital importance as Quintilian provides much of the information missing from the extant Greek treatises, 
explaining how 
 contributes to the overall persuasive effect of a speech. He shows how 
enargeia
important the ability to ‘place before the eyes’ was for the orator who wished to make his audience feel 
involved in the events of the case. More than that, he explains how the orator should achieve 
 
enargeia
through the use of mental images (
). The way in which he describes this harnessing of the 
phantasiai
power of the imagination provides the missing link between language and sight and explains a great deal 
about how 
 was thought to work. In particular, Quintilian’s explanation of the role of 
 
enargeia
phantasia
in both the creation and the reception of vivid language helps to explain why it was reasonable for him 
and other ancient theoreticians to speak of language’s ability to ‘make visible’ its subject matter, a claim 
that has been subjected to ridicule by at least one modern critic.   4
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:48:03.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 122-147 | Printed page 2 of 21


── PAGE 43 ──
4 See Georges 
, 
 (Paris, 1992), p. 145 (s.v. évidence): ‘Par-delà de 
Molinié Dictionnaire de rhétorique
la 
naïveté linguistique de la présentation traditionnelle (cette fameuse et ridicule suppression de l’écran du 
, avec l’idée que l’auditeur est transformé en spectateur), on sera particulièrement sensible au 
discours
caractère social de cette qualité’ [Beyond the linguistic naivety of the traditional formula (the notorious 
, with the idea that the listener becomes a 
and ridiculous suppression of the screen that of discourse
spectator), it is important to note the social and cultural aspects of this quality] (my italics).
The nature of 
, and its close association in ancient thought with the sense perceptions stored in 
phantasia
memory, also help to explain how rhetoricians could be so seemingly sure of the precise impact of their 
appeals to the imagination, which is to us the most untrammelled and individual of faculties. This 
chapter and the next will therefore explore the theories of language, memory and the imagination which 
underlie the use of 
 – and thus of ekphrasis – in rhetoric. Though the focus of this study is on 
enargeia
the rhetorical contexts for ekphrasis, much of this theoretical background is relevant to the use of 
ekphrasis in other genres such as history or poetry – for the type of imaginative response which 
Quintilian assumes in an audience was considered typical of readers of different types of text.
Enargeia and Persuasion
As we have seen, Quintilian makes the same distinction as does Nikolaos between a plain statement of 
facts (
) and a developed account which makes the audience feel present at the events 
diēgēsis/narratio
described and emotionally involved in them. In forensic oratory this effect has two main functions. One 
is related to the orator’s duty to inform his audience of the facts of his case (naturally, the facts as he 
would like them to be seen, rather than as they necessarily happened). This can be achieved through a 
plain statement of facts, but a vivid account has the advantage of capturing the audience’s attention, of 
being more immediately memorable and comprehensible, like the paintings which Quintilian (6.1.32) 
says were sometimes displayed in courtrooms. To mention just some examples from classical Greek 
oratory, Lysias, identified as a master of 
 by Dionysios of Halikarnassos, includes fast-moving 
enargeia
yet vivid accounts of the domestic arrangements in the house of Euphiletos, who stands accused of 
murdering his wife’s lover, in his first oration (9–14), and of the murder of his brother in the twelfth 
oration, 
 (6–16).
  Demosthenes’ often cited evocation of the devastation wreaked 
Against Eratosthenes
    
5
on Phokis has already been mentioned. Another example is his carefully constructed narrative of the 
response in Athens to the news of the fall of Elatea, which similarly involves the reader through the 
inclusion of details such as the time of day (‘It was the evening …’) and the preparations for the 
emergency meeting of the Assembly.
  Kathy 
 has argued persuasively that theories of 
 
    
6
Eden
enargeia
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:48:03.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 122-147 | Printed page 3 of 21


── PAGE 44 ──
were in fact developed originally in classical Greece for such forensic contexts in which ‘the narrator set 
out to reproduce the vividness of ocular proof through language’ in the absence of physical evidence. 
Only later was this theory applied to discussions of poetry and other forms of literature.
  
 in 
    
7 Enargeia
historiography or poetry can create similar effects, as was outlined in 
, but in forensic oratory it 
Chapter 1
has the additional function of making the audience into virtual witnesses by making them ‘seem to see’ 
the events described by the speaker. In this, 
 attempts to achieve the unattainable ideal of a 
enargeia
judge who has witnessed the crime and thus can reach a decision that is certain and not subject to the 
vagaries of interpretation and probability.   8
5 See Dionysios of Halikarnassos, 
, 7 and Graham 
, ‘
 in the ancient criticism of 
Lysias
Zanker
Enargeia
poetry’, 
, 124 (1981): 297–311.
RhMus
6 Demosthenes, 
, 169–171 (which is cited as an example of 
 in 
De Corona
diatupōsis
Tiberios, De figuris 
, 43).
Demosthenicis
7 Kathy Eden, 
 (Princeton, 1986), pp. 72–3 and 91–
Poetic and Legal Fiction in the Aristotelian Tradition
2. This does not mean, of course, that the practice of 
 did not exist in poetry prior to any 
enargeia
theoretical developments. On vividness as a kind of proof in Ciceronian oratory, see also Vasaly, 
, p. 25 and pp. 254–5 and Innocenti, ‘Towards a theory of vivid description’, p. 374.
Representations
8 See Françoise 
, ‘L’argumentation dans la rhétorique antique: une introduction’, 
, 8 
Desbordes
Lalies
(1990), p. 87: ‘Pour le juge, l’idéal est le flagrant délit …: il voit que X est coupable …’ [For the judge, 
the ideal is for the criminal to be caught in the act …: he can see that X is guilty.]
Inseparable from this representational and informative function of 
 is its ability to move the 
enargeia
audience and to make them feel the emotions appropriate to the events described. This it shares with the 
pieces of physical evidence which were sometimes brought into Roman courtrooms: the swords, blood-
spattered cloaks, fragments of bone and wounds which served both to confirm the speaker’s version of 
events and to arouse the emotions of the audience (6.1.30). In fact, Quintilian’s treatment of 
 in 
enargeia
Book 6 of the 
 is part of a broader discussion of emotional appeals, and this 
Institutio oratoria
combination of a feeling of presence and the arousal of the appropriate emotions is the key to the 
rhetorical function of ekphrasis: the audience should feel not just that they understood the facts and 
arguments intellectually, but that they were with the speaker, whether Demosthenes learning the fate of 
Elatea or Euphiletos, the wronged husband of Lysias 1, finding his wife in bed with her lover. Some 
examples of the use of ekphrasis in judicial and deliberative oratory – as reflected in the Greek treatises 
on declamation – as well as epideictic will be examined in greater detail in 
. Here, I want to 
Chapter 6
explore some of the questions that are raised by the rhetoricians’ references to ‘placing before the eyes’, 
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:48:03.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 122-147 | Printed page 4 of 21


── PAGE 45 ──
in particular to see whether Quintilian can provide some of the information, missing from the 
, about how this effect can be achieved.
Progymnasmata
Achieving Enargeia
Quintilian’s activities as critic are subordinate to his role as a teacher and practitioner of rhetoric: his 
concern is not just to analyse texts, but to show his readers how to achieve those same effects. In the 
case of 
 his advice varies between the enigmatic and the illuminating. One means of achieving 
enargeia
 which he and others mention is through the inclusion of details, and therefore corresponds to 
enargeia
the definition of ekphrasis as an expanded and developed narration offered by Nikolaos. Quintilian 
provides the example of the sacked city cited in 
 to illustrate the 
 that results from 
Chapter 3
enargeia
details (‘ex pluribus’, 8.3.66). The statement ‘the city has fallen’ may communicate the basic facts 
perfectly well, as he says (8.3.67), but in order to have an emotional effect on the listener, to ‘penetrate 
the emotions’, the speaker needs to ‘open up’ this basic statement and to describe the constituent actions: 
the flames, the collapsing roofs, the flight and lamentation of the inhabitants. Quintilian’s other example 
of 
 ‘ex pluribus’ is a passage from a lost speech by Cicero describing the aftermath of a drunken 
enargeia
party, in which the event is described through a selection of its visible consequences (
, 
Institutio oratoria
8.3.66): 
Videbar uidere alios intrantis, alios autem exeuntis, quosdam ex uino uacillantis, quosdam hesterna
ex potatione oscitantis. Humus erat inmunda, lutulenta uino, coronis languidulis et spinis cooperta
piscium.
I seemed to see some coming, others going, some staggering with the effect of the wine, some
yawning from the previous day’s drinking. The floor was filthy, smeared with wine, covered with
wilting wreaths and fish bones.
Here, the main event, the party, is conveyed through the description of different elements: the actions (
) of the people who had been involved and the appearance of the place (
) in which it had 
pragmata
topos
occurred, just as the account of the sacked city mentions the ruined and burning buildings, the distraught 
inhabitants and the victors.
  In the case of the party, the event is described not as it unfolds but through 
    
9
the signs which the speaker claims to have witnessed, and which he aims to make the audience witness 
as he describes them, a special type of effect which will be discussed in more detail in 
. In both 
Chapter 6
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:48:03.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 122-147 | Printed page 5 of 21


── PAGE 46 ──
cases, however, the 
, the parts of narration which play such an important role in the Greek 
peristaseis
exercise of ekphrasis, would have been a useful aid in teaching students how to achieve a similar effect 
in their own compositions.
9 On the use of the 
 in this passage, see Piet 
, ‘Invention, imagination et théories des 
peristaseis
Schrijvers
émotions chez Cicéron et Quintilien’, in 
 (Utrecht, 1982), p. 403. See 
Actus: Festschrift H.L.W. Nelson
also Jean-Pierre 
, ‘L’
 et la notion de description dans la rhétorique antique’, 
, 41 
Aygon
ecphrasis
Pallas
(1994), p. 48.
Other authors also mention the inclusion of details as productive of 
. Dionysios of 
enargeia
Halikarnassos attributes Lysias’ vividness to his inclusion of attendant circumstances (ta 
) (
, 7), by which he may mean the incidents which play no direct part in the case, 
parakolouthounta
Lysias
such as the wife’s teasing of her husband in Lysias 1, but which play a vital role in establishing 
character, making us feel that we know the speaker. For the first-century BCE critic Demetrios, 
 
enargeia
results from reference to detail (
).
  For him, 
 also derives from the attendant 
akribologia     
10
enargeia
circumstances (
), illustrated by the description by an unknown author of the sound of a 
ta sumbainonta
farmer’s footsteps as he approaches, which conveys through a single detail the gait and demeanour of 
the character: ‘it was, for instance, once said of a countryman’s walk that “the noise of his feet had been 
heard from afar as he approached”, the suggestion being that he was not walking at all but stamping the 
ground, so to say’.   
11
10 Demetrios, 
, 209–10, trans. W. Rhys Roberts. Demetrios’ other examples, a Homeric simile of 
On Style
a man diverting water to irrigate a garden (
, 21.257) and a passage from the funeral games in 
, 
Iliad
Iliad
23.379–81 (Diomedes’ pursuit of Eumelos in the chariot race) correspond to the type of scene-painting 
we are talking about. Some of the examples he goes on to discuss suggest a different sense of 
, 
enargeia
as a type of verbal emphasis. See Manieri, 
, pp. 133–7.
L’immagine poetica
11 Demetrios, 
, 217. See Roos 
, 
 
On Style
Meijering Literary and Rhetorical Theories in Greek Scholia
(Groningen, 1987), p. 41. As this example shows, sight is not the only sense involved in 
.
enargeia
The inclusion of telling detail is also important to the other type of 
 which Quintilian mentions 
enargeia
in Book 8. This is a brief sketch ‘in which an image of the whole is somehow depicted’.
  The 
    
12
examples are the boxing match from the 
 (5.426) and the brief description of Verres with his 
Aeneid
mistress from Cicero’s 
, which Quintilian says affected him particularly as a reader. 
Verrine Orations
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:48:03.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 122-147 | Printed page 6 of 21


── PAGE 47 ──
The difference between this and the previous type (‘ex pluribus’) may be that this second type expands 
the depiction of one element of narration (an action and persons, respectively), while the party and the 
sacked city both include references to the visual appearance of persons, places and actions.
12 Quintilian, 
, 8.3.63: ‘est igitur unum genus, quo tota rerum imago quodammodo 
Institutio oratoria
verbis depingitur’. On this type of image, see Alessandra Manierii, 
, pp. 141–4.
L’immagine poetica
But, in the end, as Innocenti notes, these practical suggestions on how to achieve 
 in the 
enargeia
rhetorical handbooks are less than satisfying.
  Demetrios’ claim that 
 is achieved by ‘leaving 
    
13
enargeia
nothing out and cutting nothing short’ (
, 209) appears to 
to paralipein mēden mēd’ ektemnein, On Style
ignore the drastic selection of details which is entailed by any verbal account of any subject, his own 
examples being no exception. Quintilian does the same when he asks of Cicero’s description of the 
party: ‘what more would anyone who had actually entered the room have seen?’
  Like Demetrios, he 
    
14
leaves aside the question of selection, though it is clear that any impact derives largely from the nature of 
the precise details Cicero includes. At the same time, Quintilian’s remark completely elides the 
distinction between the words and their imaginative effect, and between that effect and the perception of 
reality.
  These evasions reveal the extent to which the conception of words as provokers of images 
    
15
could overshadow attention to the more formal aspects of a text. To account for the effect of these 
passages 
 might prefer to focus on the use of figures, on the choice of vocabulary and the arrangement 
we
of words. But this is not the case for the ancient critics. Despite the fact that Quintilian’s accounts of the 
party and the sacked city occur in his discussion of style in oratory, he pays no attention to the language.  
  Instead, he is astonishingly vague, saying simply of the latter, ‘If one opens up [the idea of the sack] 
  
16
there will appear …’, as if through an act of verbal conjuring. No reference is made to the verbal 
medium except as a portrait of what ‘appears’. At the same time, he seems to assume that the orator’s 
imagination (the scene that appears to him as he ‘opens up’ the brief statement), its verbal expression 
and the image which ‘appears’ in the audience’s mind as a result of these words are both simultaneous 
and identical, and that this image can be equivalent to the direct perception of a thing.
13 Innocenti, ‘Towards a theory of vivid description’, p. 360.
14 Quintilian, 
, 8.3.67: ‘quid plus videret qui intrasset?’
Institutio oratoria
15 See the comments of Eleanor 
, 
Leach The Rhetoric of Space: Literary and Artistic Representations of 
 (Princeton, 1988), p. 17, who notes that ‘The spectator 
Landscape in Republican and Augustan Rome
sees far more, since the orator’s selection and balance has conferred a neat and stylized order upon the 
chaotic picture of degeneracy he wants to evoke.’
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:48:03.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 122-147 | Printed page 7 of 21


── PAGE 48 ──
16 The figures of speech used in this example (as Aphthonios advised for ekphrasis) are all passed over in 
silence, despite the fact that Quintilian will go on to enumerate several of them in the course of Books 8 
and 9: use of accumulation (
 – a technique of amplification discussed by 
sunathroismos
Quintilian, 
, 8.4.27) underlined by 
 (breathless repetition of ‘et’ 9.3.51) and 
Institutio oratoria
polysundeton
 (9.3.78). It is also worth noting that, according to 
, 43, 
homoioptōton
Tiberios, De figuris Demosthenicis
some authorities differed on whether 
 was a figure of speech or a figure of thought.
diatupōsis
Enargeia and Phantasia
The vagueness about the linguistic aspects of 
 and the confidence in its powers displayed by 
enargeia
rhetoricians are significant. They point to the complexities of a phenomenon which goes beyond the 
normal functions of language and which can often only be expressed, as in the case of ekphrasis itself, 
by recourse to metaphor and simile.
  They are also a consequence of the way in which language and 
    
17
image were thought to interact in the mind of both speaker and listener. Quintilian’s understanding of the 
process emerges more clearly earlier in the 
 when, in Book 6, he discusses the 
Institutio oratoria
production of 
 from the orator’s point of view and discloses his understanding of the 
enargeia
psychological processes involved. In his discussion of how to arouse emotion in a murder case he 
suddenly breaks into a display of 
 which is close in subject matter and in some of its details to 
enargeia
Theon’s example of the vivid evocation of a murder to be used as part of a common place (109.3–11, 
cited in 
, above), a subject that seems to have been a schoolmaster’s favourite: 
Chapter 3
17 Manieri, 
, p. 148 notes that ‘#vάργεια è una nozione difficilmente racchiudibile 
L’immagine poetica
negli schemi della precettistica retorica’ [
 is a notion that was difficult to encompass within the 
enargeia
schemes of rhetorical theory].
When I am lamenting a murdered man will I not have before my eyes all the things which might
believably have happened in the case under consideration? Will the assailant not suddenly spring out,
will the victim not be terrified when he finds himself surrounded and cry out or plead or run away?
Will I not see the blow and the victim falling to the ground? Will his blood, his pallor, his dying
groans not be impressed on my mind? This gives rise to #vάργεια, which Cicero calls 
 and 
illustratio
, by which we seem to show what happened rather than to tell it; and this gives rise to the
evidentia
same emotions as if we were present at the event itself.
Hominem occisum queror: non omnia quae in re praesenti accidisse credibile est in oculis habebo?
non percussor ille subitus erumpet? non expauescet circumuentus, exclamabit uel rogabit uel fugiet?
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:48:03.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 122-147 | Printed page 8 of 21


── PAGE 49 ──
non ferientem, non concidentem uidebo? non animo sanguis et pallor et gemitus, extremus denique
expirantis hiatus insidet? Insequetur #vάργεια, quae a Cicerone inlustratio et euidentia nominatur,
quae non tam dicere uidetur quam ostendere, et adfectus non aliter quam si rebus ipsis intersimus
sequentur. (6.2.31–2)
As in Theon’s version, the ‘showing’ is not subjected to any form of 
 analysis. But it is clear 
linguistic
from this passage why this is the case: 
 is conceived of as the result of an internal, 
enargeia
psychological
process. For Quintilian, the first step in producing 
 in a speech was for the orator to imagine the 
enargeia
subject for himself. To borrow Quintilian’s own image from Book 8, the idea of murder is ‘opened up’ 
in the orator’s own mind and some key phases of the action are organized into a temporal sequence, 
from the aggressor’s first appearance on the scene to the victim’s dying breath. His account of the scene 
is presented as a description of the mental process in the form of a series of rhetorical questions 
describing the visual and aural details he would summon up for himself. Quintilian makes no explicit 
comment on his use of language, preferring instead to enact the production of 
. And, in the very 
enargeia
act of verbalizing his exercise in visualization, he demonstrates 
, like the magician pulling the 
enargeia
rabbit out of his hat. His seamless progression from precept to practice, combined with his reticence 
about language, suggests that words are important to this process only as the means by which an internal, 
mental image is conveyed from speaker to listener.   
18
18 See Mireille 
, ‘La notion d’imagination chez les anciens II: la rhétorique’, 
, 26 (1980), 
Armisen
Pallas
p. 14: ‘Tout en passant par le logos, écrit ou parlé, la phantasia rhétorique annule cet intermèdiaire et se 
résout en une nouvelle représentation mentale qui est l’écho dans l’esprit de l’auditeur de l’image initiale 
conçue par l’orateur’ [Even as it is transmitted by the word (whether written or spoken) rhetorical 
phantasia cancels out this intermediary and takes the form of a new mental image which is the echo, in 
the listener’s mind, of the initial image conceived by the orator].
Immediately before this display of 
 in action Quintilian had given more details about the 
enargeia
speaker’s mental processes. The speaker is said to summon up his own vision of the scene by means of 
, a Greek term glossed in Latin as ‘visiones’. It is a process which he compares to the 
phantasiai
spontaneous habit of daydreaming (he mentions travelling, fighting and possessing wealth as common 
fantasies) and which, he claims, the speaker can cultivate in himself as part of his training as an orator: 
What the Greeks call 
 (we shall call them ‘visiones’, if you will,) are the means by which
phantasiai
images of absent things are represented to the mind in such a way that we seem to see them with our
eyes and to be in their presence. Whoever has mastery of them will have a powerful effect on the
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:48:03.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 122-147 | Printed page 9 of 21


── PAGE 50 ──
emotions. Some people say that this type of man who can imagine in himself things, words and
deeds well and in accordance with truth is ‘good at imagining’ (
).
euphantasiōtos
Quas φαvτασίας Graeci uocant (nos sane uisiones appellemus), per quas imagines rerum absentium
ita repraesentantur animo, ut eas cernere oculis ac praesentes habere uideamur, has quisquis bene
ceperit, is erit in adfectibus potentissimus. Quidam dicunt ε#φαvτασίωτov, qui sibi res uoces actus
secundum uerum optime finget. (6.2.29–30)
For Quintilian, therefore, effective 
 in oratory – and in poetry, as he goes on show – is the result 
enargeia
of a controlled and conscious process of visualization. He seems to believe that, although this ability, 
like the others required by the speaker, varied from individual to individual, it could be developed by 
training. So it does seem, as suggested in 
, that the expectation of visual response was far more 
Chapter 1
widespread and developed among ancient audiences than among modern readers. Not only was it talked 
about and theorized, but students were encouraged to imagine and to assume that the texts they read 
were the products of others’ powers of visualization. All this must have encouraged an awareness of 
visualization as an important element of both reading or listening to others’ work and creating one’s own.
Communicating Images: Enargeia and Phantasia
In his own examples of 
 (the murder and the sacked city of Book 8) Quintilian assumes a live 
enargeia
performance situation in which the transmission of mental images and their concomitant emotions 
between a speaker and his audience is a vital part of rhetorical interaction in the forum or school. Ps.-
Longinos describes the process in a similar way, with similar vocabulary, explaining 
 as 
phantasia
resulting ‘when, under the effects of inspiration and passion, you seem to see what you are speaking 
about and bring it before the eyes of your listeners’ [#ταv # λέγεις #π’ #vθoυσιασμo# κα# πάθoυς 
βλέπειv δoκ#ς κα# #π’ #ψιv τιθ#ς τo#ς #κoύoυσιv].   
19
19 Ps.-Longinos, 
, 15.1.
On the Sublime
This formulation rolls the distinct moments of Quintilian’s account into one single process, termed 
. Both make more specific the vague, uncontextualized reference in the 
 to the 
phantasia
Progymnasmata
‘eyes’ (
) to which the subject of an ekphrasis (
) is displayed. These are the mind’s 
opsis
to dēloumenon
eyes of the audience to whom the speech is addressed and who form the equivalent of a painting, or 
rather a set of moving impressions, in their imagination.
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:48:03.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 122-147 | Printed page 10 of 21


── PAGE 51 ──
Ps.-Longinos’ use of the single term 
 to encompass the author’s imagination, the words he 
phantasia
utters and the resulting impression in the listener’s mind reveals the intimate connections between 
mental images and the words that both result from and create them. Words and mental images are not 
the only phenomena to be fused in this way, for both Quintilian and ps.-Longinos assume that what the 
audience will feel that they can ‘see’ is the same as what the orator ‘sees’ and that the listener or reader 
will share the vision that he has created in his mind. In this way, the speaker’s visual image is assumed 
to be transmitted to the audience through the medium of words and to give rise to a comparable image in 
their minds.
Accessing the Author's Imagination
Both Quintilian and ps.-Longinos write as if vivid language can actually give access to the mind which 
gave rise to it. That is, if 
 arises from mental images, it must be possible to work back up the 
enargeia
chain and to reconstruct the creative process, or rather the original mental image which gave rise to the 
words that prompt the reader’s own mental image. Both authors make comments to this effect with 
reference to examples of 
 in poetry. Ps.-Longinos (15.2) remarks that Euripides, when he wrote 
enargeia
, 255–7 (‘Mother, I beg you, do not set upon me the bloodstained, snakelike virgins! Here they 
Orestes
come, pressing upon me!’), must have seen the Furies who Orestes imagined were tormenting him. 
‘Here,’ he claims, ‘the poet saw the Furies himself and compelled the audience to almost see what he 
imagined (
)’.
  In his discussion of 
 in Virgil, Quintilian likewise asks, ‘had the 
ephantasthē
    
20
enargeia
poet not thoroughly (‘penitus’) conceived an image (‘imago’) of death to be able to say [of the Argive 
Antores] ‘and, dying, he remembered sweet Argos?’
  These claims rely on the assumption that the 
    
21
poet himself worked by creating mental images that he then expressed in words (as Aristotle 
recommended to the tragic poet for other reasons in the 
, 1455a) and that these same words can 
Poetics
therefore allow the reader to access and share this image. So it is with the orator: both the speaker and 
the listener are involved in the creation of mental images and both are metaphorical painters of these 
immaterial images.
20 #vτα#θ’ # πoιητ#ς α#τ#ς ε#δεv ’Εριvύας. # δ’ #φαvτάσθη, μικρo# δε#v θεάσασθαι κα# τo#ς 
#κoύovτας #vάγκασεv. As Armisen, ‘La notion d’imagination chez les anciens II’, p. 15 notes, 
Euripides’ passage works less by the description of details than by its emotional intensity, as revealed by 
the viewer’s response. On this passage, see also Jean-Louis 
, ‘Faut voir à voir! Considérations 
Labarrière
pseudo-Longiniennes’, 
, n.s. 4 (2006): 71–93.
Métis
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:48:03.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 122-147 | Printed page 11 of 21


── PAGE 52 ──
21 
, 6.2.33: ‘non idem poeta penitus ultimi fati concepit imaginem, ut 
Quintilian, Institutio oratoria
diceret: “Et dulces moriens reminiscitur Argos?”’ (
, 10, 782).
Aeneid
In both these examples of poetic 
 the evocation of a character’s perceptions – Orestes’ 
enargeia
hallucination and Antores’ final memories – plays a vital role. In the second example, as Jean-Pierre 
Aygon has noted, Quintilian has in mind a passage several lines long.
  But the single line quoted does 
    
22
seem to bear a special significance: Antores’ death is conveyed by the briefest of evocations of the final 
thoughts and images that passed through his mind, while Orestes’ words contain direct allusions to the 
appearance of the Furies. In both cases, the poet’s mental image, to which the reader has access through 
the text, is itself a representation of the character’s mental image.
  There is thus a chain of images 
    
23
which ultimately allows the reader or listener both to share in the experience of the character and to 
admire the skill of the poet.
22 Jean-Pierre 
, ‘“Imagination” et description chez les rhéteurs’, 
, 63 (2004), pp. 118–19.
Aygon
Latomus
23 Although it is not stated by Virgil, it is likely that Quintilian assumed that Antores’ memory of his 
homeland itself took the form of a visual image, given the close association between sense perceptions 
and memory in ancient thought, on which, see below.
The Impact on the Listener
Quintilian’s discussion of 
 reveals a conception of language as an active force.
  Both he and 
enargeia
    
24
ps.-Longinos use powerful, physical imagery to express the impact of vivid speech on the listener, a 
reminder that theirs is still a predominantly oral conception of language.
  For Quintilian, vivid 
    
25
language ‘penetrates the emotions’, while for ps.-Longinos rhetorical 
, the end result of which 
phantasia
is 
, ‘not only persuades but enslaves the listener’ [o# πείθει τ#v #κρoατ#v μόvov, #λλ# κα# 
enargeia
δoυλo#ται].
  When, in Book 8 of the 
, Quintilian contrasts the plain statement of 
    
26
Institutio oratoria
facts (
) with the vivid version of the same events he distinguishes the effect of the two types of 
narratio
discourse in terms of their physical impact on the listener. The plain statement reaches only the ears 
while the vivid version, the equivalent of ekphrasis, ‘displays the subject to the eyes of the mind’: 
24 As noted by Molinié, 
, p. 145: ‘[Le discours] est appréhendé ainsi comme 
Dictionnaire de rhétorique
acte, come dynamisme qui peut même modifier la réalité de la situation existentielle, concrète, des 
partenaires dans la relation oratoire’ [[Speech] is thus perceived as an action, as a dynamic force which 
can even change the reality of the actual situation in which the partners in the rhetorical exchange find 
themselves].
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:48:03.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 122-147 | Printed page 12 of 21


── PAGE 53 ──
25 On an understanding of language as power and action as typical of oral cultures, see Walter 
, 
Ong
 (London and New York, 1988), pp. 31–2.
Orality and Literacy: The Technologizing of the Word
26 Ps.-Longinos, 
, 15.9.
On the Sublime
It is a great skill to be able to speak of our subject matter clearly and so that it seems visible. For the
speech is not sufficiently effective, nor does it have as complete a control as it should if it merely
reaches the ears so that the judge thinks that the facts of the case are being told to him and not
expressed in full and displayed to his mind’s eye.
Magna uirtus res de quibus loquimur clare atque ut cerni uideantur enuntiare. Non enim satis efficit
neque, ut debet, plene dominatur oratio, si usque ad aures ualet, atque ea sibi iudex de quibus
cognoscit narrari credit, non exprimi et oculis mentis ostendi. (8.3.62)
The implication is that vivid language reaches different parts of the mind, penetrating more deeply into 
the listener to reach the ‘mind’s eye’ (the Latin distinguishes between inner and outer senses of sight, 
where our Greek sources do not). The distinction between words which stay on the surface of the body, 
by which Quintilian presumably means plain statements of fact and arguments, and those which 
penetrate inside to appeal to the ‘eyes of the mind’, reveals a conception of the human body as 
permeable and of words as a quasi-physical force, both of which are familiar from other ancient sources.  
  The difference is more than a technical distinction between ‘showing’ and ‘telling’. Instead, it lies in 
  
27
the way each mode of discourse is received by the listener: 
 derives from the innermost recesses 
enargeia
of the speaker’s mind and works its way inside the listener to produce its intense effect.
27 Even at the elementary level of the 
, Theon (72.1–2) recommends that students should 
Progymnasmata
aspire to make their words ‘dwell in the mind’ of their listeners. Plutarch, 
, 37F–38B 
Moralia
recommends ear-guards to protect the young. The eyes were considered particularly vulnerable openings 
– see below on the effect of the sight of the beloved upon the viewer. On words as physical entities in 
Stoic thought, see Catherine 
, 
 (Cambridge, 1993), p. 44 on Diogenes 
Atherton The Stoics on Ambiguity
Laertios, 7.55–6. See also Gorgias’ corporeal logos (
, 8).
Encomium of Helen
So the judge must be made to feel not just that he is hearing the facts of the case, but that he can actually 
see the events playing out before his eyes.
  Such a display is by no means sufficient by itself. It is clear 
    
28
from Quintilian’s discussion that rhetorical 
 is just one weapon in the orator’s arsenal and this is 
enargeia
echoed by ps.-Longinos when he introduces an important qualification to the dominating power of 
 in oratory: it is only when used in combination with factual arguments that 
 works 
enargeia
phantasia
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:48:03.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 122-147 | Printed page 13 of 21


── PAGE 54 ──
this effect. When an orator does manage to combine the two he is, by implication, invincible.
  Both 
    
29
supply a term that was missing from most of discussions of ekphrasis in the 
: the 
Progymnasmata
emotion which accompanies the mental image ‘placed before the eyes’. For ps.-Longinos, 
, 
phantasia
whether in poetry or oratory, aims for emotive effect (
) and to stir the listener (
to pathētikon
to 
).
  For Quintilian, a brief statement (‘brevis nuntius’, 
) in a speech conveys the 
sunkekinēmon     
30
diēgēsis
basic information adequately but ‘penetrates the emotions’ less than the expanded version (narration 
with 
, ekphrasis).
  Indeed, the mental image itself is almost superfluous. Its function is to 
enargeia
    
31
arouse the desired feeling in the listener, whether the vague feeling of pleasure (
) that Nikolaos 
hēdonē
ascribed to ekphrasis in epideictic contexts or the feeling of indignation (
) or its concomitant, 
deinōsis
pity, associated with accounts of the fall of cities.
  Even when the effect is not what we might strictly 
    
32
speaking call ‘emotional’, the physical understanding of the impact of 
 means that a reader
enargeia
/listener who conceives an image of any kind in his or her mind is still undergoing a 
 of some kind 
pathos
as he or she experiences the words’ effect.   
33
28 Leach, 
, p. 15 interprets Quintilian’s words as implying the ‘production of a 
The Rhetoric of Space
static image’, but Quintilian’s wording allows for events to be ‘displayed’ as developing scenarios, as 
the parallel with 
 suggests. See also above on the association between 
 and movement 
narratio
enargeia
in the scene described.
29 Ps.-Longinos, 
, 15.9. The further comments about the potentially overwhelming impact 
On the Sublime
of 
 in rhetoric at 15.11 need to be read in this context.
phantasia
30 Ps.-Longinos, 
, 15.2.
On the Sublime
31 
, 8.3.67: ‘in adfectus minus penetrat brevis hic velut nuntius’. In Theon, 
Quintilian, Institutio oratoria
, 71, ll. 31–2, too, it is words that are vivid (
) that will inhabit the listeners’ 
Progymnasmata
enargēs
minds.
32 Demosthenes, 19.65 is cited by Nikolaos as an example of the use of ekphrasis to achieve 
 
deinōsis
(see above, 
, p. 76). See also the 
, 4.39.51 and Cicero, 
, 
Chapter 3
Rhetorica ad Herennium
De inventione
1.54.104 and 107.
33 
 itself was understood as a type of 
. See Frédérique 
, ‘Evidence sensible et 
Phantasia
pathos
Ildefonse
discours dans le stoïcisme’, in Carlos Lévy and Laurent Pernot (eds), 
 (Paris, 1997), p. 
Dire l’évidence
116.
Enargeia and the Feeling of Presence
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:48:03.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 122-147 | Printed page 14 of 21


── PAGE 55 ──
Quintilian’s discussion of 
 in Book 6 grows out of a broader discussion of emotion and is 
enargeia
introduced as a means to an end. The use of visualization is first introduced as a means of ensuring that 
the speaker is appropriately involved in the version of events he is presenting. For, Quintilian claims, in 
order to move an audience, the speaker must himself be moved (6.2.26; cf. Horace, 
, 102). 
Ars Poetica
He draws an analogy with actors whom, he says, he has seen leaving the stage in tears because of their 
intense involvement in the plot (6.2.27–8 and 35). In terms of the effect on the audience of judicial 
oratory or declamation, the analogy with the actor is particularly apt for, like the audience in the theatre, 
they are made to be witnesses of events from the past. Quintilian emphasizes this time-warping action of 
 in a further discussion of the art of ‘placing before the eyes’ (‘sub oculos subiectio’) in 
enargeia
, 9.2.40–1 (here he treats vivid presentation as a figure called variously ‘evidentia’, 
Institutio oratoria
 and 
). Because of its capacity to make the audience feel present at past and future 
hupotupōsis
diatupōsis
events, this effect is also called ‘translatio temporum’ or, in Greek, 
 or 
 (a 
metastasis
metathesis
‘transference [of time]’) (9.2.41).
  The listener may be transported either to the past, or to a 
    
34
hypothetical future, as is shown in the passage Quintilian cites from Cicero’s 
 (33) which 
Pro Milone
paints a picture of the future consequences of an action.
  
 is more than a simple switch in 
    
35 Metathesis
the time referred to in the speech. Instead, the speaker is said to transport his audience in imagination 
back or forward to the events in questions, making use of the ability of 
 to make them feel ‘as 
enargeia
if’ they were present.
34 See Meijering, 
, p. 42. The Greek term 
 appears in modern 
Literary and Rhetorical Theories
metastasis
editions of Quintilian, but Isidore of Seville, 
, 34 uses 
 in this sense: ‘Metathesis 
De rhetorica
metathesis
est [figura] quae mittit animos iudicum in res praeteritas aut futuras’ [
 is [the figure] which 
Metathesis
sends the minds of judges to past or future events] (the examples are an appeal to remember the sack of a 
city and the evocation of future troubles from 
, 33, an example also used by Quintilian). I 
Pro Milone
will follow Isidore in using 
 in the sense of ‘transference of time’ to avoid confusion with the 
metathesis
technical sense of 
 in declamation to mean ‘transference of blame’.
metastasis
35 Ps.-Longinos, 
, 15.9 cites a similar attempt to play ‘let’s suppose’ from Demosthenes, 
On the Sublime
24.208 (also from the end of a speech). These examples correspond to the third type of 
 
diatupōsis
identified by 
, 43 (the evocation of hypothetical events).
Tiberios, De figuris Demosthenicis
Enargeia, as discussed by Quintilian, shares this power with poetry (as is evident from his frequent use 
of poetic examples and from ps.-Longinos)
  and with historiography. The subtlest discussion of the 
    
36
similarities and differences between 
 in oratory and poetry is to be found in ps.-Longinos, who 
enargeia
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:48:03.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 122-147 | Printed page 15 of 21


── PAGE 56 ──
gives serious consideration to the nature and function of visualization in poetry, unlike the rhetoricians 
who, on the whole, use poetic examples for their own ends. As we have seen, he states that both aim to 
move and stir the reader or listener, but this statement is prefaced by an attempt to explain the 
differences between what he terms ‘
’ in poetry and oratory: 
phantasia
36 As noted in 
 above, ps.-Hermogenes also compares 
 to poetry.
Chapter 3
diaskeuē
It will not escape your attention that rhetorical 
 has one aim while, when used by poets, it
phantasia
has another nor that the goal of phantasia in poetry is astonishment (
) while that of rhetoric is 
ekplēxis
, though both seek to create an emotional effect and excitement.
enargeia
   
37
37 Ps.-Longinos, 
, 15.2.
On the Sublime
#ς δ’ #τερόv τι # #ητoρικ# φαvτασία βoύλεται κα# #τερov # παρ# πoιητα#ς o#κ #v λάθoι σε, o#δ’
#τι τ#ς μ#v #v πoιήσει τέλoς #στ#v #κπληξις, τ#ς δ’ #v λόγoις #vάργεια, #μφότεραι δ’ #μως τό τε
<παθητικòv> #πιζητo#σι κα# τό συγκεκιvημέvov.
Longinos’ attribution of 
 to rhetoric alone is unusual in that the term is frequently used 
enargeia
elsewhere of vividness in poetry. He makes his distinction clearer at the end of his discussion of 
 when he returns to its use in rhetorical contexts after an extended discussion of passages from 
phantasia
tragedy: 
Nevertheless, in the poets, 
 involves a type of exaggeration that is more suitable to myth
phantasia
and, as I have said, goes beyond the bounds of credibility, while the best form of rhetorical phantasia
respects the possible (
) and the true (
) …
emprakton
enalēthes
o# μ#v #λλ# τ# μ#v παρ# τo#ς πoιητα#ς μυθικωτέραv #χει τ#v #περέκπτωσιv, #ς #φηv, κα# πάvτη
τò πιστòv #περαίρoυσαv, τ#ς δ# #ητoρικ#ς φαvτασίας κάλλιστov #ει τò #μπρακτov κα# #vάληθες … 
 
38
38 Ps.-Longinos, 
, 15.8.
On the Sublime
As Roos Meijering points out, poets have a greater freedom than orators in that they are able to ‘place 
before the eyes’ scenes that are fantastic and impossible in the real world (such as Furies or Phaethon’s 
heavenly ride in the chariot of the Sun) as well as scenes that are lifelike.
  For orators to pretend to see 
    
39
Furies (as ps.-Longinos claims contemporary speakers do) is an absurdity that he condemns as 
inappropriate. As the first contrast between poetry and rhetoric suggests, a further difference lies in the 
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:48:03.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 122-147 | Printed page 16 of 21


── PAGE 57 ──
effect on the listener of such visualization. While poets need only create a stunning impact (
) on 
ekplēxis
the listener, orators need to shape and control both the subject matter and its presentation, subordinating 
it to the specific requirements of the speech. Firstly, the subjects of rhetorical 
 must be like truth 
enargeia
(
). In this, rhetorical visualization does have the connotations of direct perception that are 
enalēthēs
present in the root sense of the terms 
 and 
: they are at least close to the world that is the 
enargeia
enargēs
object of that perception.
  But this closeness is only relative, in comparison to the fantastic subjects of 
    
40
poetic 
.
phantasia
39 Meijering, 
, pp. 71–2.
Literary and Rhetorical Theories
40 See Barbara 
, ‘Procédures sophistiques pour construire l’évidence’, in Carlos Lévy and Laurent 
Cassin
Pernot (eds), 
 (Paris, 1997), pp. 15–29; On the 
Dire l’évidence: philosophie et rhétorique antiques
meanings of the term, see Manieri, 
, pp. 105–12 and Juliette 
, ‘De la 
L’immagine poetica
Dross
philosophie à la rhétorique: la relation 
 et 
 dans le traité 
 et l’
entre phantasia
enargeia
Du sublime
’, 
, 4 (2004): 61–93.
Institution oratoire
Philosophie antique
In underlining the need for the images used by orators to be in accordance with truth, ps.-Longinos 
echoes other sources on 
 and related terms. Several times Quintilian repeats the key advice that, 
enargeia
when summoning up an image to be conveyed in words, the speaker should be careful to confine himself 
to what is ‘like truth’ or ‘what usually happens’ or what is ‘credible’.
  His attribution of power to the 
    
41
orator who is 
 (6.2.30) contains the important qualification that the images must be 
euphantasiōtos
‘secundum uerum’, ‘in accordance with truth’. This requirement is not surprising. Probability and 
verisimilitude (distinct ideas but with a considerable amount of overlap in practice) were the hallmarks 
of the rhetorical presentation of facts.
  The reasons seem obvious: a narrative needs to conform to an 
    
42
audience’s expectations of what is likely or probable and to their experience of the world if it is to be 
believed. As Quintilian notes (4.2.34), the question of truth is a different matter: many true things are not 
credible, whereas untrue things can be like truth (‘uerisimilia’). It is this discussion that leads to 
Quintilian’s first mention of 
 (4.2.63–5), where he insists, in opposition to some other nameless 
enargeia
authorities, that a false story needs to be as vivid (‘euidens’, 
) as possible if it is to be 
enargēs
convincing. He thus makes clear that likeness to truth is a quality that results from the orator’s 
presentation of his story, rather than from the underlying facts themselves.
  The concern for 
    
43
verisimilitude that we see in the discussions of 
 is one indication of its rhetorical function for 
enargeia
the quality of ‘likeness to truth’ was vital in narrations just as the ideas of probability and credibility 
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:48:03.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 122-147 | Printed page 17 of 21


── PAGE 58 ──
played a vitally important role in rhetorical argumentation. The multiple interconnections of 
 
enargeia
and ekphrasis with these notions will be explored further in the next chapter. But before moving on to 
this, it is important to note another, rather different aspect of 
.
enargeia
41 
, 6.2.30, the speaker should visualize ‘secundum verum’ [according to 
Quintilian, Institutio oratoria
truth]; 6.2.31 ‘omnia quae in re praesenti accidisse credibile est’ [everything that could credibly have 
happened in the present case]. In his discussion of 
 in 
, 3.15 (p. 167, ll. 11–17), ps.-
diaskeuē
On Invention
Hermogenes similarly emphasizes the need for such depictions to be credible (
) and probable (
pithanos
).
eikos
42 
, 4.2.31 treats the terms ‘uerisimilis’, ‘probabilis’ and ‘credibilis’ as 
Quintilian, Institutio oratoria
interchangeable. On these terms, see, for example, Claude 
, ‘
 et les noms latins de la 
Moussy
Signum
preuve: l’héritage de divers termes grecs’, in Jacqueline 
 (ed.), 
Dangel
Grammaire et rhétorique: notions 
 (Strasbourg, 1994).
de Romanité
43 I would therefore not agree with Cockcroft, ‘Fine-tuning Quintilian’s doctrine of rhetorical emotion’, 
p. 503, who suggests that ‘Quintilian would be likely to favour a literal and unambiguous factual 
representation of that 
 originally taken into his mind and now again visualised.’
res
Enargeia and Illusion
Ultimately, whether in poetry, rhetoric or historiography, whether it represents credible or incredible 
things, verbally produced 
 is always a matter of illusion. It thus exists in a constant tension 
enargeia
between presence and absence. The fact that 
 produces an illusion is present in the terms for 
enargeia
likeness which are used everywhere, as in the terms of approximation (‘all but’) we find in the 
discussions of ekphrasis. For Plutarch, the reader of Thucydides is merely ‘like’ a spectator; Quintilian’s 
ideal audience are made to feel ‘as if’ (‘quam si’) they were present at the murder. Moreover, even as 
Plutarch stresses the overwhelming sense of involvement in the events of Athenian history created by 
Thucydides’ narrative (
, 346F; see 
, above), he underlines the illusion involved by 
Moralia
Chapter 1
referring to Simonides’ comparison of poetry to painting, the art of visual representation. The 
comparison of 
 to the visual arts, made explicitly by Plutarch and implicitly elsewhere, also 
enargeia
draws attention to the illusion involved in 
 and to the way in which verbal depiction creates a 
enargeia
feeling 
 that of presence which is not presence.
like
A further analogy, which similarly conveys both the power of 
 and the unreality of its creations, 
enargeia
is with the stage. When Nikolaos compares the audience of ekphrasis to spectators, the term he uses, 
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:48:03.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 122-147 | Printed page 18 of 21


── PAGE 59 ──
, implies the theatre just as much as the visual arts. Quintilian’s suggests an even closer link to the 
theatai
stage with his comparison of the orator who uses 
 to arouse his own emotions with the actor 
phantasia
who is so involved in his role that he cries real tears (6.2.27–8 and 35). In this respect the orator and the 
actor both share the paradoxical state of feeling imaginary things as if they were real, a state which they 
are able to induce in their audiences as well.   
44
44 See Schrijvers, ‘Invention, imagination et théories des émotions chez Cicéron et Quintilien’, pp. 395–
408.
Quintilian attributes some of the force of the speaker’s display of feeling to the fact that he is speaking 
of real events in which he is to some extent involved (indirectly as advocate, if not directly), but he 
makes clear that fictional events can affect the listener equally. He even recommends that schoolboy 
declaimers should think themselves into the roles they assume in their exercises, advice which assumes 
that emotional involvement in a fictional situation is both possible and desirable (6.2.36). Some sources 
reveal a certain anxiety about this identification: the Elder Seneca, for example, records anecdotes about 
orators who lost the ability to distinguish between their own mental images, their 
, and reality 
phantasiae
and fell into a state of madness akin to that of Orestes.
  It may be to distinguish the type of 
 
    
45
phantasia
involved in rhetorical 
 from the uncontrolled hallucinations of a madman that Quintilian chose 
enargeia
to compare the orator’s imaginings with daydreams, which remain under the dreamer’s conscious 
control.
  However, it is noticeable that the loss of ability to distinguish between visualization and 
    
46
reality is not attributed to the audience, nor is it a common idea in the Greek sources. The difference may 
reflect the different contexts of Greek and Roman rhetorical practice for, while the Greek theorists wrote 
for speakers who, in theory at least, discussed and evoked events that had occurred to them, the Roman 
practice of using an advocate meant that speakers in judicial cases were commonly required to become 
emotionally and imaginatively involved in events that concerned their clients rather than themselves.
45 See Juliette 
, ‘De l’imagination à l’illusion: quelques aspects de la phantasia chez Quintilien et 
Dross
dans la rhétorique impériale’, 
, 4 (2004–2005): 273–90.
Incontri triestini di filologia classica
46 
, 6.2.30. Quintilian describes these reveries as a ‘vice of the soul’ (
Quintilian, Institutio oratoria
animi 
).
vitium
Different texts play in different ways on the paradoxes of 
, on the simultaneous presence of the 
enargeia
absent and absence of presence that are produced. Some examples of the ways in which authors of 
epideictic oratory and creators of the fictional worlds of declamation and the Greek novel exploit the 
ambiguities of the illusions they create will be discussed in further detail in 
. For the moment, 
Chapter 7
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:48:03.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 122-147 | Printed page 19 of 21


── PAGE 60 ──
however, what concerns us is the rhetorical use of ekphrasis and 
 as a means of persuasion. 
enargeia
While never losing sight of the illusion involved, rhetoricians tend to place emphasis on the 
 of 
ability
words to create presence, rather than the problematic nature of that presence. This emphasis is hardly 
surprising, and particularly appropriate to the communicative situation of oratory, where the audience is 
caught up in the immediacy of the speech and its performance, with little time to reflect critically on the 
nature of their experience.
Conclusions
Enargeia is therefore far more than a figure of speech, or a purely linguistic phenomenon.
  It is a 
    
47
quality of language that derives from something beyond words: the capacity to visualize a scene. And its 
effect also goes beyond words in that it sparks a corresponding image, with corresponding emotional 
associations, in the mind of the listener. This process lies behind the uses of 
 and ekphrasis in 
enargeia
oratory and in other types of text. The discussions of 
 in rhetorical sources are particularly 
enargeia
interesting because of the very careful attention paid to audience response and the question of how an 
audience’s verbally induced imaginings can be predictable, as they must be if the speech is to be 
successful.
47 Armisen, ‘La notion d’imagination chez les anciens II’, pp. 13–14 makes the same point about 
 in rhetoric.
phantasia
On the surface, the ancient orators’ model of ‘opening up’ and developing a basic statement of fact into 
a detailed and vivid account bears some similarities with the theory of description proposed by Philippe 
Hamon in his article of 1972, further developed in his book of 1981.
  Hamon proposes a definition of 
    
48
description as the ‘exploration of the lexical field’ in which an introductory theme or ‘pantonyme’, such 
as ‘garden’ or ‘house’ gives rise to the enumeration of a series of ‘subthemes’ (rose, chimney) and 
predicates (snow, smoking).
  This strictly linguistic approach has the advantage of breaking with the 
    
49
long-standing tradition of defining description by its subject matter and the further advantage of 
removing the representation of reality from the equation (since description is seen as a purely lexical 
phenomenon).
  On a formal level, Hamon’s definition of description is comparable to Quintilian’s idea 
    
50
of ‘unfolding’. Just as striking, however, are the radical differences in orientation and in the basic 
assumptions about language which underpin the two approaches. Quintilian is almost perverse in his 
refusal to analyse the linguistic aspects of 
, but his insistence on the 
 engagement of 
enargeia
imaginative
both speaker and listener draws attention to a factor which is left out of Hamon’s account of description. 
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:48:03.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 122-147 | Printed page 20 of 21


── PAGE 61 ──
In this, Hamon typifies the modern critical neglect of imaginative response. What Hamon does share 
with the ancient rhetorical discussions of 
 is an interest in the role of the reader/audience and 
enargeia
the contribution demanded of them. But, for Hamon, description engages the 
 competence of the 
lexical
reader.
  The two differ so radically in their approaches that it is clear they are speaking from very 
    
51
different worlds. Where Hamon sees only words, Quintilian sees words as the communicable aspect of 
mental images which are crucial to the formation and reception of those words. Quintilian and Hamon 
are working with radically different conceptions of language, and of the relation of words to external 
reality on the one hand, and to their speakers and audiences on the other.
  In order to understand the 
    
52
ancient rhetorician’s perspective a little better, it is necessary to move on to the theories of imagination 
and memory on which 
 and ekphrasis are predicated. These explain some of the questions raised 
enargeia
by the use of 
 in rhetoric while shining a spotlight onto some of the paradoxes involved in 
enargeia
making absent things present.
48 Philippe 
, ‘Qu’est-ce qu’une description?’, 
, 112 (1972): 465–85 and 
Hamon
Poétique
Introduction à l’
 (Paris, 1981), subsequently reissued under the title 
 (Paris, 1993). I 
analyse du descriptif
Du descriptif
cite the later edition here and elsewhere. For a critique of Hamon’s approach to description, see Jean 
, ‘Logiques de la description’, 
, 91 (1992): 363–82.
Molino
Poétique
49 Hamon, ‘Qu’est-ce qu’une description?’, pp. 474–6; 
, p. 128.
Du descriptif
50 See particularly Hamon, 
, p. 91.
Du descriptif
51 
, pp. 41–2.
Ibid.
52 See the remarks of Claude 
, ‘Quand dire c’est faire voir: l’évidence dans la rhétorique antique’, 
Calame
, 4 (1991): 13–14 on the differences between 
 and description.
Etudes de lettres
enargeia
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:48:03.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 122-147 | Printed page 21 of 21


── PAGE 62 ──
Conclusion
The study of the ancient treatments of ekphrasis shows that it was understood to be a type of speech that 
worked an immediate impact on the mind of the listener, sparking mental images of the subjects it 
‘placed before the eyes’. As an elementary exercise, ekphrasis gave practice in this type of speech, 
showing students how to expand the various elements of a narration to make sure their listeners not only 
knew what happened but felt as if they were witnesses themselves. The key to the nature and function of 
ekphrasis is its defining quality of 
, the vividness that makes absent things seems present by its 
enargeia
appeal to the imagination. Though 
 is used frequently in genres such as historiography and 
enargeia
poetry, its effects can also be thoroughly rhetorical, helping the orator to involve his audience (and 
himself) emotionally and imaginatively in the subject of the speech and thus to promote their acceptance 
of the ideas he is putting forward. When integrated into a full-scale speech, ekphrasis served to involve 
the listener imaginatively and emotionally in the events at issue, making them share the speaker’s 
indignation at a crime or, in the more complex examples, altering their perception of a fact by placing 
them in the situation of an eyewitness and making them share that viewer’s experience. In this way, 
ekphrasis and 
 underline the emotive and communicative aspects of rhetorical discourse and the 
enargeia
way in which it involves the action of one mind upon another.
  In particular, these rhetorical uses of 
    
1
ekphrasis demanded an active engagement from the listener who was prompted by the speaker’s words 
to supply details, such as the actions and events that preceded the scenes of devastation that are a 
recurrent subject. In epideictic contexts, the effects of ekphrasis could be particularly subtle, involving 
an interaction between the audience’s knowledge of an actual sight and the verbally induced mental 
image.
1  See, in particular, Chaïm 
, 
 (Paris, 1977), 
Perelman L’Empire rhétorique: rhétorique et argumentation
pp. 23–5. 
Works of rhetorical theory, such as the 
 or Quintilian’s 
, can help 
Progymnasmata
Institutio oratoria
reveal the assumptions that underpinned the composition and reception of many ancient texts, 
assumptions that were often too deeply rooted to need full articulation. In many ways, these works are 
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:48:56.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 257-260 | Printed page 1 of 3


── PAGE 63 ──
far from ‘theoretical’ as they are strongly oriented towards practice, so that the orator’s experience or 
received wisdom takes the place of explicit analysis and exposition of the underlying ideas. In the case 
of ekphrasis, one consequence of this lack of explicit theorization seems to have been that the ideal end 
result of imaginative and emotional involvement could be lost from sight. The manuals seem to have 
encouraged a certain formalistic conception of ekphrasis as a detailed presentation that was not 
necessarily vivid. At the same time, the habit of proposing all the concrete elements of narration as 
subjects for ekphrasis encouraged the development of ekphraseis of subjects such as places and persons 
as independent entities rather than as elements of a narrative.
The category of ekphrasis thus overlaps in some cases both the modern category of ‘description’ and the 
category of ‘descriptions of works of art’ without, however, being coextensive with either group. Some 
ekphraseis are of works of art; some are of objects presented as static interruptions to narration (in 
Achilles Tatios’ novel in particular and at the end of Heliodoros’ 
 where our desire for closure 
Aithiopika
is repeatedly frustrated by ekphrasis). Many of these have fruitfully been analysed as such using modern 
insights born of the study of the modern novel. But these are not the defining examples of ekphrasis; 
rather, I would suggest that they are often special cases that are used to reflect upon the conventions of 
ekphrasis and to point out, as in the case of Philostratos, the questions that lurk beneath the confident 
assertions of the handbooks.
Ekphrasis and Art
The category of ‘ekphraseis of works of art’ may not have been central to the definition of ekphrasis as it 
was conceived and discussed by the rhetoricians, but the analogy with the visual arts, not to mention the 
theatre, underlies the idea of ekphrasis and 
. As a type of language which makes the listener 
enargeia
‘see’, an ekphrasis of any subject aims theoretically to create an effect similar to that of a painting or 
sculpture. The relationship between word and image in ekphrasis is thus mimetic not in the sense of 
‘producing a copy of’ but in the sense that ekphrasis ‘acts like’ a painting. The analogy goes far further 
in that the audience of an ekphrasis, like the viewer of a painting, can be required to supply information 
from his or her knowledge of the narrative background. The analogy with the visual arts also points 
towards the fictional nature of the products of ekphrasis and 
: like painting, they may have the 
enargeia
power to create an illusion of presence, making the listeners feel as if they were in the presence of their 
subjects, but this feeling of presence is combined with an awareness of absence. An author like 
Philostratos makes use of the idea of painted representation to dramatize and play upon this combination 
of involvement and distance that is at the core of the reception of both ekphrasis and painting. 
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:48:56.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 257-260 | Printed page 2 of 3


── PAGE 64 ──
Ekphraseis of sculptures raise similar questions, except that, in their case, the parallel tensions between 
the medium and the subject represented, between stillness and movement, the frozen moment and its 
wider context, are much more emphatically present. Buildings form another prominent class of subject 
matter for ekphrasis that is shared by both the ancient and some, at least, of the modern definitions. 
Here, too, the visible details of the building can be used to point towards the invisible attributes of the 
building, whether the actions of the patron which the speaker wishes to associate with the building or its 
unseen, spiritual qualities.
The Uses of Ekphrasis
The ancient definition may seem frustratingly vague and elusive, but its interest lies precisely in this lack 
of formal precision. The identification of any passage as an ekphrasis is only a first step in its analysis. 
Each case needs to be studied in its context to reveal its particular qualities and its function, and what is 
true of one ekphrasis will not necessarily be true of another. Where the unity is to be found is in the 
underlying ideas and the wider conceptions of reading, or the individual’s relation to the word and of the 
interaction between language, memory and imagination. The study of ekphrasis and 
 provides 
enargeia
important information about ancient habits of reading and deeply rooted attitudes towards texts, which 
are seen as inviting imaginative and emotional involvement. These ancient modes of reading can be 
surprisingly different to our own: in the case of Thucydides’ history, ancient readers saw not a 
dispassionate and objective account of events but a window onto the violent and turbulent events of the 
past.
  In these rhetorically oriented readings, the text opens up to the reader’s imagination: the words 
    
2
on the page dissolve into images as they impact upon the mind. This does not mean that ekphraseis, or 
any other type of ancient text, can only be read according to these ancient frameworks, nor that modern 
insights into, say, description cannot be fruitfully applied to individual examples – far from it. But it 
does mean that we cannot assume that ancient readers and writers shared our modes of reading and our 
ways of categorizing texts. Sources like the humble 
 provide precious insights into the 
Progymnasmata
practices that shaped ancient and medieval writing and reading habits.
2  Simon 
, ‘What is ekphrasis for?’, 
, 102 (2007): 5–6. 
Goldhill
CP
Webb, Ruth. Ekphrasis, Imagination and Persuasion in Ancient Rhetorical Theory and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gatech/detail.action?docID=438979.
Created from gatech on 2025-08-08 19:48:56.
Copyright © 2009. Taylor & Francis Group. All rights reserved.
Ebook pages 257-260 | Printed page 3 of 3
