# \textit{Ekphrasis
# Source: Webb - 1999 - Ekphrasis ancient and modern The invention of a genre.pdf
# BibTeX key: webb_ekphrasis_1999
# Zotero dir: 3106
# Extracted chars: 49908
# Format: PDF
============================================================

── PAGE 1 ──
Word & Image
A Journal of Verbal/Visual Enquiry
ISSN: 0266-6286 (Print) 1943-2178 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/twim20
Ekphrasis ancient and modern: The invention of a
genre
Ruth Webb
To cite this article: Ruth Webb (1999)  Ekphrasis ancient and modern: The invention of a genre,
Word & Image, 15:1, 7-18, DOI: 10.1080/02666286.1999.10443970
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/02666286.1999.10443970
Published online: 14 Sep 2012.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 2841
View related articles 
Citing articles: 17 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=twim20


── PAGE 2 ──
I - This article contains material presented 
at a Round Table on Ekphrasis at the 
Universite de Paris-Nanterre in March 
1994. An expanded version will form part 
of a book currently in progress on ekphrasis 
in ancient and Byzantine rhetoric. 
2 - For example, Murray Krieger, Ekphrasis: 
The Illusion qf the Natural Sign (Baltimore, 
I 991);JamesA. W. Heffernan, Museum qf 
Words: The Poetics qf Ekphrasis from Homer to 
Ashbcry (Chicago, 1993); Grant F. Scott, The 
Sculpted Word: Keats, Ekphrasis, and the VISual 
Arts (Hanover, 1995); Peter Wagner (ed.), 
Icons - Texts - Iconotexts: Essqys on Ekphrasis 
and Intermediality (Berlin, 1996). 
3 - Jean Hagstrum, The Sister Arts: The 
Tradition qf Literary Pictorialism in English Poetry 
from Dryden to Grqy (Chicago, 1958), p. 18, 
n. 34; Philippe Hamon, La description 
littiraire: de l'antiquite a Roland Barthes (Paris, 
1991),p.8. 
4 - Scott, Sculpted Word, p. I. 
5 - For example, W. Steiner, The Colors qf 
Rhetoric: Problems in the Relation Between 
Modem Literature and Painting (Chicago, 
1982), p. 4 I: 'The technical term for this is 
ekphrasis, the concentration of action in a 
single moment of energy .. .'; Heffernan, 
Museum qfWords, p. 3 cited below; Stephen 
Bann, The True Vine: On Visual Representation 
and the Western Tradition (Cambridge, 1989), 
p. 28: 'Ekphrasis as a genre of writing is 
dependent first all on tlJe risky presumption 
that tlJe visual work of art can be translated 
into terms of verbal discourse ... .' 
6 - The problem has also been pointed out 
by Raymond A. Macdonald in a Review 
Essay of Kreiger, Ekphrasis, in Word & 
Image, (1993), pp. 81-6. 
7 - Heffernan, IX/ I Museum qfWords, p. 3. 
8 - Scott, Sculpted Word, p. I. 
Ekphrasis ancient and modern: 
the invention of a genre! 
RUTH WEBB 
In contemporary critical terminology 'ekphrasis' has come to be firmly 
associated with the subject of this journal: word and image. Mention 
'ekphrasis' to an art historian, literary critic or classicist, and the examples 
that spring to mind are likely to include the Homeric Shield of Achilles 
and its many literary imitations, the rhetorical and allegorical descriptions 
of paintings written by later Greek prose authors, like Lucian and the 
Elder and Younger Philostratos or, from more recent periods of Western 
literary history, John Keats' meditation on his tantalisingly still and silent 
Grecian Urn. This 'genre', or 'trope', of ekphrasis evokes a network of 
interlocking questions and interests, from the positivist pursuit of lost 
monuments described in ancient and medieval ekphrasis to the poststructur-
alist fascination with a textual fragment which declares itself to be pure 
artifice, the representation of representation. 
Today, numerous publications have ensured that the term is firmly 
attached to issues of word and image.
2 By a sort of etymological magic, 
the Greek word is even seen to bear its meaning inscribed within it. Jean 
Hagstrum defended his idiosyncratic use of the term to designate texts in 
which the work of art 'speaks out,' by the use of etymology, translating 
'ekphrasis' as a speaking (phrazo) out (ek) , while for Philippe Hamon the 
preposition, ek, conveys the separable nature of these descriptions of art 
objects which exemplifY the nature of description as a detachable fragment, 
distinct from its narrative frame. 3 (A more flexible etymology, which the 
critic can interpret at will, is the one which simply translates the term as 
'a telling, a speaking out.'4) 
But when one looks more closely at the range of definitions on offer, 
one is inevitably struck by a degree of divergence strangely at odds with 
the belief in a quasi-immanent meaning suggested both by the modern 
etymologies and the many assertions of what 'ekphrasis is' to be found 
in the burgeoning literature.5 The confidence of all these assertions is 
striking, too striking perhaps, for it masks some fundamental (but rarely 
stated) disagreements about the nature of ekphrasis.6 For some, ekphrasis 
includes descriptions of non-representational arts, for others it is the 
'verbal representation of visual representation. '7 On the one hand ekphrasis 
is a 'classic genre' with its roots deep in antiquity, on the other scholars 
do not agree about which works should be included in this genre: do 
descriptions of buildings count? Does 'description' include a catalogue 
entry?8 As each new study redefines the term to fit the critic's selection 
of works and to accommodate a particular critical stance, one is tempted 
to ask whether there is in fact a single phenomenon that can usefully be 
called 'ekphrasis.' 
WORD & IMAGE, VOL. 15, NO. I, JANUARY-MARCH 1999 
7 
ISSN 0266-6286 © 1999 Taylor & Francis Ltd 


── PAGE 3 ──
Appeal to the testimony of antiquity might then seem like a reasonable 
step. Ekphrasis, after all, is an ancient term and the practice of describing 
works of art goes back to Homer. But, as anyone who has taken this step 
from the modern to the ancient definition knows only too well, the ancient 
sources only complicate the question. The rhetorical handbooks offer a 
definition, but not the one expected. As is well known, 'ekphrasis' in 
antiquity had a far wider range of meaning than it does in modern 
criticism. As far as the rhetoricians were concerned, ekphrasis could be a 
description of a person, a place, even a battle, as well as of a painting or 
sculpture. And even though certain highly polished and sophisticated 
descriptions of paintings or artifacts, like Philostratos' Imagines, or the 
Shield of Achilles, were classified as 'ekphraseis' in antiquity, the technical 
writers on ekphrasis hardly evoke discussions of the visual arts, or the special 
questions raised by their translation into a verbal medium. 
Most studies on ekphrasis begin with a nod in the direction of the original 
meaning of the term, and modern scholars have accounted for this discrep-
ancy in various ways. One strategy is simply to dismiss the ancient rhetor-
icians: their definitions are too vague and broad to be useful; they are 
merely talking about a general type of description that does not merit 
further attention.9 This strategy has the advantage of leaving the critics 
free to propose what they see as a more useful definition for the immediate 
purpose. On occasion they even correct the ancient sources. Roland 
Barthes, for example, seems to have assumed that the rhetoricians had 
carelessly forgotten to mention works of art when he added this category 
to his, otherwise accurate, account of ancient ekphrasis. '° Several critics 
who, like Barthes, have first-hand familiarity with the ancient rhetorical 
sources simply ignore the discrepancy, conflating the ancient and modern 
definitions into one. Thus George Kennedy slips seamlessly from ancient 
to modern ekphrasis when he gives an entirely accurate account of ekphrasis 
as defined by Aphthonios in the fourth century CE (in which there is no 
mention of works of art) followed immediately by a brief survey of descrip-
tions of works of art in ancient oratory. I I Yet another strategy is to claim 
that the restricted modern meaning does in fact have ancient authority, 
that the meaning changed over the first centuries CE and that already in 
Late Antiquity 'ekphrasis narrows its focus and becomes a specialized 
genre devoted to objets d'art.lI2 
Should we worry about such a cavalier treatment of an ancient term? 
It is after all indisputable that there is a group of texts, starting with the 
inevitable Shield of Achilles, that have works of art as their subject-matter 
and which, as a group, raise a range of important questions about verbal 
and visual representation. Does it really matter whether a few obscure 
rhetoricians living in some corner of the later Roman Empire would have 
recognized these texts as forming a genre, or whether they would 
have called this genre 'ekphrasis?' If the term is being used as a purely 
abstract tool to focus reflection, the answer may be 'no.' But the moment 
questions of literary history enter the picture, as they do in almost all 
studies of 'ekphrasis,' terminology surely does matter. Few literary histor-
ians would deny that knowledge of how a genre was defined in a particular 
period is important if we want to gain some understanding of the produc-
tion and reception of texts. Philostratos' Imagines, for example, take on a 
8 
RUTH WEBB 
9 - For example, N. Land, The Vzewer as 
Poet: The Renaissance Response to Art 
(University Park, 1994), p. xvi. 
10 - Roland Barthes, 'L'effet de reel', in 
Litterature et realitt!, ed. R. Barthes et at. (Paris, 
1982), p. 84; S. Rabau, 'Narration et 
description: l'exigence de details', Lalies, xv 
(1995), pp. 273-89. 
I I - George Kennedy, A New History qf 
Classical Rhetoric (Princeton, 1994), p. 206: 
'The subjects [of ekphrasis] ... may be 
persons, actions, times, places, animals, and 
growing things .... Ekphrasis is an 
important feature of classical literature, 
beginning with the Shield of Achilles.' 
P. DuBois, History, Rhetorical Description and 
the Epicfrom Homer to Spenser (Cambridge, 
1982), p. 4 performs a similar manoeuvre 
when she states that 'the description in 
words of a work of plastic art, the ekphrasis 
was one of the progymnasmata.' 
12 - Scott, Sculpted Word, p. I. 


── PAGE 4 ──
13 - Svetlana Alpers, 'Ekphrasis and 
aesthetic attitudes in Vasari's Lives',Joumal 
if the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes, XXIII 
(1960), pp. 190- 215. 
14 - Patricia Rubin, Giorgio Vasari: Art and 
History (New Haven and London, 1995), 
PP·275-6. 
15 - Scott, Sculpted Word, chapter I; idem, 
'The Rhetoric of Dilation: ekphrasis and 
ideology', Word & Image, VII (1991), 
pp. 301-10, discussing the review ofH. S. 
Boyd, Select Passages if the Writings if 
St Chrysostom, St Gregory Nazianzen, and 
St Basil (London, 1813), The Edinburgh 
Review (1814), pp. 59-72. 
different hue when viewed against the background of rhetorical ekphrasis 
in all the breadth of the ancient definition, rather than being considered 
as members of a genre devoted to the description and/or interpretation 
of works of art. In the next section I will try to outline what the ancient 
definition of ekphrasis was and how the Imagines might be understood as an 
an example of ekphrasis in this sense. Ekphrasis as defined in antiquity 
emerges as a type of discourse that differs radically from the 'description 
of a work of art' we have come to expect, but the ancient rhetoricians' 
discussions nevertheless raise questions about the interaction of word and 
image, text and imagination. 
So there is more than just philological correctness at stake in the 
definition of 'ekphrasis.' The lure of the modern meaning has too often 
obscured the ancient meaning, which is worthy of study in its own right. 
Definitions are also of crucial importance if one is to gain an accurate 
picture of tradition and continuity. It is one thing to borrow an ancient 
term (like 'ekphrasis' or, to take an example from another domain, 
'democracy') and endow it with an altered meaning. It is quite another 
to assume that the shared name is a sign, or proof, of real historical 
continuity. Svetlana Alpers suggested in her seminal article that Giorgio 
Vasari was following a 'rhetorical tradition of ekphrasis' and was con-
sciously placing himself in that tradition in his own writings. '3 This claim 
has been hugely influential, despite the fact that Alpers adduces very 
little evidence beyond Vasari's supposed familiarity with Philostratos and 
Lucian. Her argument rests on the power and ambiguity of the term 
'ekphrasis'. But terminology does not constitute history. As an obscure 
Greek rhetorical term it was, in fact, hardly known to Renaissance 
scholars and the few who did know it used it in the broader ancient 
sense which it had in Byzantine Greek. The only 'rhetorical tradition of 
ekphrasis' which a writer of Vasari's period could have known as such 
was one which encompassed descriptions of all kinds of subjects and was 
not confined to works of art. The extent and nature of Vasari's use of 
individual classical models is a complex question which is only obscured 
by the assumption that he conceived of his writings within a unified 
classical tradition of writing on art. '4 The projection of the modern 
meaning of 'ekphrasis' back to the Renaissance serves to facilitate this 
assumption and to mask what is particular about Vasari's enterprise. The 
modern critic may now wish to categorise Vasari's descriptions alongside 
those of Lucian or Philostratos for the purpose of comparison or contrast, 
but this does not mean that these works formed any sort of continuous 
tradition, a nuance which is obscured by giving them all the ancient 
label 'ekphrasis'. 
On a more basic level, it is important, especially given the wide range 
of possible meanings of ekphrasis, to know precisely how the term is being 
used each time it is encountered. Clearly, ancient rhetoricians did not 
mean 'description of a work of art' when they used the term, but what 
about later writers? When the anonymous author of the 1814 Edinburgh 
Review article cited in the Oiford English Dictionary and discussed by Grant 
Scott referred to 'florid effeminacies of style ... in a love-letter of 
Philostratus, or an ecphrasis of Libanius', can one be sure that the modern 
sense of 'description of a work of art' was in his mind?'5 Or was he using 
9 


── PAGE 5 ──
the term in something closer to the ancient sense, in which case the 
quotation is only tangentially relevant to the relationship between art and 
literature (though highly revealing of nineteenth-century attitudes towards 
rhetoric and description)? The more likely answer is the latter, for the 
modern, specialized definition of ekphrasis turns out on further inspection 
to be far more modern than is usually assumed. The restriction to 'descrip-
tions of oijets d'art' dates not to late antiquity (the broad ancient definition 
was still familiar to Byzantine writers), nor even to the Renaissance (when 
the term was used as a translation of descriptio, or copied directly from 
Byzantine sources, when it was used at all), but as far as I have been able 
to trace its development only to the mid-twentieth century. 
First of all, the absence of the term from the type of context in which 
one would now expect to find it is striking. Gotthold E. Lessing, for 
example, did not use the term in the Laokoon, the discussion of the relation-
ship of poetry to painting in which the Shield of Achilles, now considered 
the grandmother of all ekphraseis, features prominently. Even Paul 
Friedlander, who is generally credited with having compiled the first and 
most thorough survey of ekphrasis in ancient and Byzantine literature in 
1912, does not use the term in its modern sense. '6 'Ekphrasis' does occur 
in the lengthy Introduction to two early Byzantine ekphraseis of monuments, 
but it is used strictly in accordance with ancient practice, when discussing 
a group of texts which, like the Philostratean Imagines, were rhetorical 
ekphraseis whose subject-matter was a work of art and which therefore fell 
into the range of his survey. As the title of his study indicates, 
'Kunstbeschreibung' is used to designate what critics now know as 'ekphr-
asis'. What Friedlander achieved was certainly to define the group of texts 
that would come to be known as examples of ekphrasis in classical literature. 
He shaped conceptions of the 'genre' ekphrasis without giving it a name. 
But it was not until the 1950s, with the work of Leo Spitzer and Jean 
Hagstrum and, in the domain of archaeology, the entry by Glanville 
Downey in the Reallexikon for Antike und Christen tum, that the term came to 
the attention of a wide scholarly audience and acquired the first versions 
of its restricted meaning which has since undergone an endless process of 
revision and refinement. 17 
It was the prodigiously learned and inventive Spitzer who, in 1955, 
coined the definition which most people now recognise ('ekphrasis, the 
poetic description of a pictorial or sculptural work of art') and ensured 
that Keats' Urn would stand alongside the Shield of Achilles as one of the 
defining members of the new genre. '8 Until then, with a few notable 
exceptions, the term had been largely confined to works of philology, 
along with other obscure late Greek rhetorical terms, and led a shadowy 
existence in the half-light of the academic footnote, rarely honoured by 
transliteration into the Roman alphabet. 
Of course Spitzer did not invent this new meaning in a vacuum. His 
coinage gained currency because the ideas it expressed were increasingly 
of interest and Friedlander's survey is itself one of the signs of this 
interest. So the story of how the term 'ekphrasis' made the transition 
from these dusty origins to the glamorous world of critical theory is a 
significant chapter in the history of ideas. It was the result of converging 
interests in the 'description of works of art' in a range of disciplines, 
10 
RUTH WEBB 
16 - P. Friedlander, Johannes von Ga;;a und 
Paulus Silentarius: Kunstbeschreibungen 
Justinianischer Zeit (Leipzig and Berlin, 
1912). 
17 - Leo Spitzer, 'The "Ode on a Grecian 
Urn," or content vs. metagrammar', in 
Essays on English and American Literature, ed. 
A. Hatcher (Princeton, 1962), pp. 67-97; 
originally published in Comparative Literature, 
VII (1955); Hagstrum, The Sister Arts; 
Glanville Downey, 'Ekphrasis', in 
Reallexikon for Antike und Christentum, vol. 4 
(Stuttgart, 1959), pp. 921-44. 
18 - Spitzer, 'The "Ode on a Grecian 
Urn"', p. 72. W. T.]. Mitchell, Iconology: 
Image, Text, Ideology (Chicago, 1985), p. 99, 
refers to the Ode as 'the ritual example' of 
ekphrastic poetry. 


── PAGE 6 ──
19 - Scholia Graeca in Homeri Iliadem, ed. 
H. Erbse, vol. 4 (Berlin, 1975), p. 64; vol. 5 
(Berlin, 1977), p. 404. 
20 - Theon, Progymnasmata, ed. M. Patillon 
(Paris, 1997), pp. 66-9 (with French 
translation); Hermogenes, 0pf:fa, ed. 
H. Rabe (Leipzig, 1913), p. 22; Aphthonios, 
Progymnasmata, ed. H. Rabe (Leipzig, 1926), 
p. 36; Nikolaos, Progymnasmata, ed.J. Felten 
(Leipzig, 1913), p. 68. The only difference 
in terminology is that Nikolaos has 
aphegematikos (from aphegema 'a telling, a tale') 
instead of periegematikos. I have preserved the 
root meaning of the latter term in the 
translation rather than translating 
'descriptive'. For more discussion of the 
possible senses, see Theon, Progymnasmata, 
p. 149, n. 323. 
2 I - Nikolaos, Progymnasmata, p. 69. 
from archaeology to English literature -
a diversity which perhaps 
helps to explain the variety of shades of meaning of the single term 
'ekphrasis' in modern criticism. I will trace this story in the second half 
of this article. First, however, I would like to explore the meaning of 
'ekphrasis' in its original context, the rhetorical tradition of the first 
centuries CEo 
Ancient ekphrasis 
The ancient scholia to Homer give a good impression of the range of 
passages which could be classified as ekphrasis in antiquity. The account of 
the Shield of Achilles, and other sets of armour, are referred to as ekphraseis, 
but so is the descent of Apollo (likened to that of a hawk; Iliad, 15, 237-8) 
and the account of Achilles sinking exhausted into sleep beside the funeral 
pyre of Patroklos (Iliad, 23, 232).'9 An even greater range of examples is 
in the Progymnasmata, elementary exercises used to train students in the 
basic skills needed to compose speeches (or indeed any other kind of text). 
The composition of an ekphrasis is one of the more advanced exercises 
following exercises in, among other things, narration, confirmation and 
refutation of a version of events, praise and blame, comparison and 
characterization. The definition of ekphrasis provided by the various ver-
sions of the Progymnasmata is practically identical. Theon (first century CE), 
'Hermogenes' (possibly second century CE), Aphthonios (fourth century 
CE) and Nikolaos (fifth century CE) all define it as: 'a speech which leads 
one around (periegematikos), bringing the subject matter vividly (enargos) 
before the eyes. '20 The authors all then go on to suggest the range of 
subject-matter proper to ekphrasis. The earliest of them, Theon, suggests 
persons (prosopa), places (topoi), times (chronoi) and events (pragmata). This 
list remains standard throughout, although it undergoes various emenda-
tions: Aphthonios adds plants and animals, while Nikolaos adds festivals, 
belatedly reflecting the dominance of epideictic oratory of celebration and 
display over the judicial oratory of the courtroom under the Roman Empire. 
The contrast with the modern definitions is clear, works of art as a 
category are of no particular importance. Nikolaos does go on later in his 
discussion of ekphrasis to give some instructions for 'when we describe 
statues or paintings or anything of this sort' but these are not included in 
his main list ofsubjects.
21 And when Theon refers to the Shield of Achilles 
it is under the idiosyncratic heading, which he is the only one to mention, 
of ekphraseis of the tropos, the manner in which something is done. What 
interests him about the Shield is the same quality praised by Lessing, the 
narrative unfolding of the making of the shield by Hephaistos, its status 
as a description not of an object but of a process. Theon, moreover, does 
not classifY the shield as art, but places it instead alongside other descrip-
tions of the preparation of military equipment. We need not place too 
much emphasis on this aspect of Theon's classification system, but it is a 
useful reminder that categories like 'work of art' are neither universal nor 
immutable. 
The most interesting aspect of the progymnasmata, though, is not the 
absence of works of art (in itself a relatively minor detail), but the way in 
which the authors define ekphrasis first and foremost as a type of speech 
(logos) that has a certain effect upon an audience. An ekphrasis appeals to 
I I 


── PAGE 7 ──
the mind's eye of the listener, making him or her 'see' the subject-matter, 
whatever it may be. The nature of the subject-matter is of secondary 
importance. One cannot help but be struck by the contrast with the terms 
in which description in general (not to mention ekphrasis in particular) is 
defined in modern textbooks. It is the subject-matter that commonly 
defines a description and which distinguishes it from narration: a descrip-
tion deals with objects, while narration deals with actions.22 Ekphrasis in 
contrast was defined in terms of its impact on an audience. 
So the very basis on which the definition is built distinguishes ekphrasis 
from the concept of description familiar from modern narratology. There 
are further radical differences that suggest that the way ancient writers 
conceived of ekphrasis was very different from the way in which we conceive 
of either description or ekphrasis in the sense of 'description of an art 
object.' Among Theon's list of subjects is pragmata, 'things done,' 'actions.' 
That 'actions' or 'events,' rather than 'objects' (as it is sometimes trans-
lated), is the sense of the Greek term, pragmata, is clear from the examples 
cited by all the authors: battles. What is more, such ekphraseis should 
progress from an account of what preceded the battle to the event itself, 
and then to its aftermath.23 This means that the fundamental distinction 
between narration (unfolding in time) and description (the problematic 
verbal representation of an object, constituting a 'narrative pause') upon 
which so much modern theory of description and its interpretation is 
based, is disregarded by the ancient theoreticians. 24 
The modern assumption that objects are the proper domain of descrip-
tion has influenced the way in which ekphrasis is often defined as a descrip-
tion of an 'art object,' a definition which it is now clear differs in spirit as 
well as in the letter from the ancient one. Barthes' treatment of ancient 
ekphrasis in 'L'effet du reel' illustrates how problematic the category of 
pragmata is for a critic who wishes to assimilate the rhetorical definition of 
ekphrasis to modern critical theories of description. The account of ekphrasis 
as defined in ancient rhetoric is accurate except for one detail: Barthes 
quietly omits the category of actions or events (replacing it with the 
category 'works of art' to bring ancient ekphrasis in line with the modern 
definition).25 The manoeuvre is scarcely detectable, but it changes the 
nature of ekphrasis, limiting its subject-matter to the static, the objectified 
and, of course, associating it with the work of art. 
Barthes' free emendation of his ancient sources implies that the range 
of subjects suggested by the progymnasmata is nothing more than a random 
selection that can be manipulated at will with no effect on the whole. But 
this is not the case. The four types of subject-matter that remain standard 
throughout the tradition from Theon to Nikolaos, persons, places, times 
and events, formed a coherent set in the ancient rhetorical system. They 
represent four of the six parts of narration (or peristaseis), corresponding to 
who? (the agent), what? (the act) and when and where? (time and place). 
Missing are the cause (why?), which is rarely amenable to being 'placed 
before the eyes,' and the manner in which the act was committed (how?). 
This last part of narration is included by Theon, and was the category in 
which he placed the Shield of Achilles, but is not found listed as a category 
elsewhere, although Nikolaos does explain how it might be included in an 
ekphrasis. 
I2 
RUTH WEBB 
22 - M. Bal, Narratology (Toronto, 1985), 
P·130. 
23 - For example, Theon, Progymnasmata, 
p.68. 
24 - Rabau, 'Narration et description'. 
25 - Barthes, 'L'effet du reel', p. 84: 
'ekphrasis . .. avait pour objet de decrire des 
lieux, des temps, des personnes ou des 
oeuvres d'art ... .' 


── PAGE 8 ──
26 - Theon, Progymnasmata, p. 69. 
27 - Nikolaos, Progymnasmata, pp. 68-9. 
28 - F. Graf, 'Ekphrasis: Die Enstellung der 
Gattung in der Antike', in Beschreibungskunst-
Kunstbrescheibung, eds. G. Boehm and 
H. Pfotenhauer (Munich, 1995), 
PP·143-55· 
29 - R. Webb, 'Imagination and the arousal 
of the emotions', in The Passions in Roman 
Literature and Thought, eds. S. Braund and 
C. Gill (Cambridge, 1997), pp. 112-27; 
idem, 'Memoire et imagination: les limites 
de l'enargeia', in Dire l'evidence, cds. C. Levy 
and L. Pernot (Paris, 1997), pp. 229-48. 
30 - Quintilian, Institutio aratoria, 6.2.30. 
So not only is ekphrasis not conceived as a form of writing dedicated 
to the 'art object,' but also it is not even restricted to objects. It is a form 
of vivid evocation that may have as its subject-matter anything -
an 
action, a person, a place, a battle, even a crocodile. What distinguishes 
ekphrasis is its quality of vividness, enargeia, its impact on the mind's eye of 
the listener who must, in Theon's words, be almost made to see the 
subject. 26 Nikolaos, the latest of the authors, gives the clearest account of 
the relation of ekphrasis to narration in the ancient rhetorical system. 
Narration is a simple account of what happened, while an ekphrasis includes 
the details that tell one how it happened, how it looked (one might add 
also how it sounded and felt).27 The difference, in Nikolaos' terms, is 
enargeia, vividness, an ekphrasis in sum is a vivid form of narration. As well 
as taking us to the heart of the ancient definition of ekphrasis, Nikolaos' 
comment reveals the meaning of the 'ek' in ekphrasis: it serves to indicate 
fullness, thoroughness. To compose an ekphrasis is to tell (phrazo) in full (ek). 
Enargeia is at the heart of ekphrasis. 28 The Progymnasmata give no explana-
tion of this quality of language, obviously assuming prior knowledge in 
their readers, but other more elaborate treatises do provide some explana-
tions. Quintilian explains both how to produce enargeia in a speech and 
what its effect upon the listener should be. In the Institutio oratoria 
(6.2.29-32) he explains that enargeia is produced when the orator uses his 
own power of imagination to conjure up a scene in his mind. This exercise 
in visualization ensures that his language will spark a mental impression 
in the mind of his audience. The function of this is made clear later on 
in the work (8.3.62). A successful orator must move his audience, must 
make them feel as if they were present at the events described, this is the 
purpose of enargeia. 
Quintilian is imprecise about the mechanics of this process, preferring 
to demonstrate with his own examples, or to describe his personal response 
to enargeia in Cicero (Institutio oratoria, 8.3.64). But his ideas do find reson-
ance in ancient theories of memory, imagination and language. The images 
impressed on the mind by sense experience linger as memory to be 
manipulated as part of memory techniques, in each act of recollection or 
even as the basis of thought itself.29 Language, particularly for Quintilian 
language which has the quality of enargeia, is produced by such images (in 
the mind of the speaker) and gives rise to other, comparable, images in 
the listener's mind. It is difficult for us, with our concept of a free and 
creative imagination, to understand how a speaker could be sure of working 
the right effect. But the imagination to which vivid language was thought 
to appeal was more a store-house of images derived from sense perception 
and informed by a common culture. To be sure of the effect of his speech 
a speaker needed to ensure that his subject-matter conformed to his 
audience's expectations and prior knowledge. It was more important that 
the events communicated by the orator should be 'like truth,' that they 
should be acceptable to the listener, than that they should actually have 
happened. 3
0 
Several of the passages Quintilian cites as examples of enargeia are 
directly paralled in the Greek discussions of ekphrasis in the progymnasmata 
and in more advanced manuals. From this combination of ancient sources 
one can arrive at some understanding of what ancient rhetoricians meant 


── PAGE 9 ──
by ekphrasis and its function. Ekphrasis was an evocation of a scene, often 
a scene unfolding in time like a battle, a murder or the sack of a city. The 
impact derived from the judicious choice of details that corresponded to 
the audience's prior knowledge and expectations, calling up the mental 
images already stocked in the store-house of memory. Such passages, far 
from constituting 'narrative pauses' (and consequently demanding inter-
pretation) were often an intensification of the narrative, introducing a 
degree of detail which would involve the audience both imaginatively and 
emotionally. And far from being independent, detachable passages, ekphra-
seis could contribute to the persuasive effect of the whole. 
This seems to be the ideal reflected by the various rhetorical authors. 
In practice the isolation of ekphrasis as an independent school exercise does 
seem to have encouraged both the composition of free-standing ekphraseis, 
like the Imagines, and in some cases a sterile proliferation of detail at the 
expense of enargeiaY Works of art, as Nikolaos acknowledges, provided 
subjects, but ekphrasis was never associated solely with these. It is interesting 
then to consider Philostratos' Imagines as ekphrasis in this ancient rhetorical 
sense, the sense in which the Younger Philostratos presumably used the 
word when he described his grandfather's work as 'ekphraseis of works of 
graphic art' in the Proem to his own Imagines. One feature of Philostratos' 
paintings that has provoked much comment is the way in which the 
descriptions often do not define a single moment which might have been 
depicted in the static medium of painting. For the nineteenth-century 
German scholars who hotly debated the existence of the gallery this was 
yet one more example of Philostratos' failure to make his language submit 
dutifully to its subject. But, if ekphrasis is a form of vivid narration, 
Philostratos' narrative presentation of his various subjects is only to be 
expected. Another objection raised by these German scholars was that 
many of the subjects derived directly from the poetsY What Philostratos' 
reliance on the poets suggests though, is that the 'paintings' reflect a 
common stock of themes, familiar from texts, the arts and, in some cases, 
the stage, which would therefore be already stored in his audience's 
memories. Philostratos' images would then be the result of a sophisticated 
interplay between remembered texts and images, painted on the canvas 
of the listener's mind. 
This discussion of the subject-matter of the Imagines serves to highlight 
the special nature of ekphraseis of the visual arts. Even when speakers are 
evoking works that, as far as one can tell, really existed, it is above all the 
subject-matter contained in the frame that they seek to 'bring before the 
eyes.' In the case of ancient and Byzantine art this subject-matter was 
familiar, often repeated and represented in both word and image. Such 
narratives had a cultural significance far greater than that of any single 
artistic representation. In the case of real works of art it is not surprising, 
therefore, that attention should be focussed on the narrative depicted. In 
the case of fictional works (or works of dubious status), like those in 
Philostratos' gallery, the frame of the painting may function in other ways 
as well: as a pretext for bringing together ekphraseis of such a variety of 
subjects, and as a metaphor, signalling the intended effect of such graphic 
descriptions. Enargeia easily suggested to ancient critics an analogy with 
painting. It is easy to forget that Simonides' often-quoted dictum that 
I4 
RUTH WEBB 
3 I - For example, the model ekphraseis of 
statues attributed variously to Nikolaos and 
to Libanios, in Libanios, Opera, ed. 
R. Foerster, Vo!' 8 (Leipzig, 1915), 
PP·491-540 . 
32 - For a summary of the arguments, see 
Philostratos, Die Bilder, ed. O. Schonberger 
(Munich, 1968), pp. 26-37. For a more 
positive assessment of Philostratos' use of 
the poets, see M. Blanchard, 'Problemes du 
texte et du tableau: les limites de l'imitation 
a I' epoque hellenistique et sous I' empire', in 
Le Plaisir de parler: etudes de sophistique comparee, 
ed. B. Cassin (Paris, 1986), pp. 131-54. 


── PAGE 10 ──
33 - Plutarch, Moralia, 346-7. 
34 - Friedrich Matz, De Philostratorum in 
describendis imaginibusfide (Bonn, 1867), p. 45. 
'painting is mute poetry and poetry speaking painting' is quoted by 
Plutarch to illustrate a discussion of enargeia. Plutarch's interest was in the 
second comparison, in the ability of a text (more precisely historical 
narrative) to represent as vividly as painting, in the quality of enargeia in 
Thucydides' history writing. 33 
Such a brief analysis cannot begin to do justice to the complexity of 
Philostratos' enterprise, but I hope that it suggests how the ancient rhetor-
ical background might shed a different light on this text. Philostratos' work 
is an important example of an ancient ekphrasis that has works of art as its 
subject and which therefore stands at the intersection of the ancient and 
modern definitions of the term. The modern reception of the Imagines also 
illustrates the problems encountered by later generations of readers in 
allocating this text to a recognizable genre and in reconciling it with 
modern expectations of 'description'. The German debates of the nine-
teenth century were sparked by Philostratos' manifest failure to provide 
the type of information expected of a 'true description' by scholars of that 
period. Philostratos is also key to the development of the new definition 
of 'ekphrasis' for it was in response to questions such as these that attention 
first began to be turned to the meaning of the term. 
The invention of a genre 
Editors of Philostratos in the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries 
had already noted that the Younger Philostratos referred to his grand-
father's Imagines as 'ekphraseis of works of graphic art' and that the term 
was also the title given to a collection of descriptions of statues by 
Kallistratos. But it was in the middle of the nineteenth century that the 
term became a subject of serious investigation. In r867 Friedrich Matz 
published a Latin treatise, De Philostratorum in describendis imaginibus fide, in 
which he argued that an understanding of the genre to which the text 
belonged was crucial to the debate on the author's reliability as a source. 
He discussed various examples of description of works of art in the Second 
Sophistic, placing Philostratos alongside Lucian, Apuleius and the Greek 
novels, and attributed this interest in art to the spirit of an age in which 
art and rhetoric flourished side by side. Matz concluded that though there 
may be grains of truth in the descriptions, Philostratos, like any writer of 
his period, inevitably introduced rhetorical embellishments.34 Matz's enter-
prise -
the removal of deceitful rhetoric to reveal the pearl of truth -
reflects his own age and archaeological interests, but his work is still of 
interest because of its attention to questions of genre and the attempt to 
understand the intellectual climate of Philostratos' period. 'Ekphrasis' 
appears only a few times, in his account of the rhetorical background to 
the Imagines, and Matz seems not to have taken a special interest in the 
term. But this was the beginning of a long association of 'ekphrasis' with 
debates about descriptions of works of art. The idea of ekphrasis as a special 
kind of description of art objects was already coming to be separated from 
the wider ancient definition. 
This focus on ekphraseis of paintings and the consequent detachment of 
these from the wider context of ancient ekphrasis was continued in the work 
of two French scholars, writing in the r 880s: E. Bertrand and A. Bougot. 
In reaction to the positivist agenda of the German school, they proposed 


── PAGE 11 ──
a reading of the Imagines as art criticism rather than reportage. Bertrand, 
whose account is enlivened by a highly imaginative account of the Elder 
Philostratos' state of mind on the day on which he 'invented art criticism,' 
echoed Matz's interest in the genre of Philostratos' text and the spirit of 
his age.35 Bertrand took a crucial further step when he grouped Philostratos 
not just with other writers of the Second Sophistic but also with Catullus 
and Virgil, and identified these works as members of 'a fashionable genre 
which has its own name.'36 The name is, of course, 'ekphrasis'. But 
Bertrand was curiously reluctant to display his find. He relegated it, 
untransliterated, to a footnote as if he were not wholly confident in his 
new use of the term. Bougot, however, showed no such reticence and used 
the term directly in his text, extending its range still further to include 
passages in Greek tragedy. 37 
The nineteenth-century focus on Philostratos and his gallery came to 
highlight and gradually alter the meaning of ekphrasis from a specific type 
of description, which may include works of art, to a description of any 
type which has a work of art as its subject-matter. Simultaneously 
Philostratos' text was detached from its immediate cultural context and 
placed in a diachronic selection of 'descriptions of works of art' which 
were grouped together regardless of differences in genre and technique. 
This is not to say that Bertrand and Bougot were indifferent to the cultural 
context of the Imagines. On the contrary, Bertrand in particular tried to 
evoke Philostratos' world, once more developing an idea first proposed by 
Matz. The world Bertrand depicted was one in which art and literature 
flourished simultaneously and where poets were constantly drawn to the 
visual arts. This is an image in which the intellectual ideals of late nine-
teenth-century France have been superimposed onto the later Roman 
Empire. In particular, the influence of Theophile Gautier, whose own 
poem l'Art (1857) explores the equivalence of verbal and sculptural artistry, 
is clearly discernable. Bertrand's ancient sophist seems to be living the 
ideal of 'l'art pour l'art.' Bertrand and Bougot's redefinitions of 'ekphrasis' 
reflect this contemporary interest in the common ground between art and 
literature, and interart comparisons. 
Bertrand and Bougot redefined the meaning of ekphrasis in response to 
their own intellectual world, in reaction to the positivism of the German 
archaeologists and encouraged by contemporary interests in the adapta-
tions of techniques from one art into another (aptly termed 'transpositions 
d'art' by Huysmans in L'Art modeme of 1883). But their focus remained 
fixed on classical texts. This is true too oflater French scholars like H. Piot 
and J. Bompaire who, in their treatments of ekphrasis in writings of the 
Second Sophistic, were careful to note the range of the ancient definition 
but chose to focus on descriptions of art and architecture because of the 
inherent interest they saw in these particular ekphraseis. Though writing in 
the second decade of the twentieth century, Piot was as thoroughly imbued 
with the spirit of Gautier as Bertrand had been. His analysis of the ancient 
sophists' 'taste for poetic vocabulary and artistic sentence structure which 
led them to cultivate that most sculptural of genres, ekphrasis,' reads like 
a paraphrase of Gautier's l'Art and is capped by a reference to 'transposi-
tions d'art.'38 But 'ekphrasis' was still more or less confined to the fields 
of classical and Byzantine art and literature until Spitzer's study of Keats' 
16 
RUTH WEBB 
35 - E. Bertrand, Un Critique d'art dans 
l'antiquite: Philostrate et son ecole (Paris, 1881), 
PP·53-4· 
36 - Ibid., p. 49. 
37 - A. Bougot, Philostrate I'Ancien: une gateri.e 
antique (Paris, 1881),p. 172. 
38 - H. Piot, Les procedes litteraires de la Second 
Sophistique chez Lucien: E ecphrasis (Rennes, 
1914), p. 22;]. Bompaire, Lucien ecrivain: 
imatation et creation (Paris, 1958), p. 707. 


── PAGE 12 ──
39 - Spitzer, 'The "Ode on a Grecian 
Urn"', p. 72. 
40 - L. Spitzer, 'Garcilaso, Third Eclogue, 
lines 265-271', Hispanic Review, xx (1952) 
p. 248, n. 5. I am grateful to Alejandro 
Coroleu for drawing my attention to this 
article. The term does not appear at all in 
an earlier study of an art object by Spitzer, 
'Wiederum Morikes Gedicht ''Auf eine 
Lampe"', Trivium, IX (1951), pp. 203-25. 
41 - Peter Wagner, 'Introduction: 
Ekphrasis, Iconotexts, and 
Intermediality -
the State(s) ofthe Art(s)', 
in Wagner (ed.), Icons -
Texts -
Iconotexts, 
PP·I-40 . 
'Ode' catapulted it into the world of English and Comparative literature. 
Spitzers' definition deserves to be quoted at length: 
it [the Ode] belongs to the genre, known to Occidental literature from Homer 
and Theocritus to the Parnassians and Rilke, of the ekphrasis, the poetic 
description of a pictorial or sculptural work of art, which description implies, 
in the words ofTheophile Gautier, 'une transposition d'art,' the reproduction, 
through the medium of words, of sensuously perceptible objets d'art ('ut pictura 
poesis').39 
Reading this confident statement one would hardly guess that it repres-
ented such a radical redefinition. Ekphrasis was now entirely divorced from 
its rhetorical background and reinterpreted as a poetic genre stretching 
not only backwards to Homer and Theocritus, but also forward to the 
nineteenth century. This article was not the first in which Spitzer had 
discussed poems on works of art, but previously the term 'ekphrasis' had 
hardly appeared. It is used once, in Greek and buried in a footnote, in an 
article on Garcilaso de la Vega's description of a tapestry which, in its 
evocation of light and shade embodied the 'transpositions d'art' which 
fascinated Spitzer toO.40 Spitzer's use of the term in the Keats article was 
new to his own reuvre and it is unlikely that he was unaware of the 
originality of the step he was taking. His distaste for footnotes and tendency 
to misattribute quotations (as with 'transpositions d'art' above) make it 
difficult to trace his sources for his definition of ekphrasis. But the examples 
he uses - including the Parnassians and Gautier - make his intellectual 
affiliations clear. And once again the redefinition of ekphrasis takes place 
in response to existing interests. Spitzer's article fell on fertile ground, 
already prepared by the New Critics' interest in the poem as artifact, an 
idea in search of a name. 
Now, the term had been thoroughly removed from its ancient meaning 
and context. Instead of designating a dynamic mode of writing thought 
to have an immediate impact on its audience and whose range of subject-
matter could include images of action and movement, 'ekphrasis' came to 
be used of a work of literature in which the movement was found only in 
the flow of language, whose subject-matter was still, objectified, making 
the poem itself an object of detached interpretation rather than an active 
stimulus to imaginative involvement. 
Conclusion 
Throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries 'ekphrasis' has under-
gone a process of gradual redefinition to conform to contemporary intellec-
tual and esthetic preoccupations. This process, which it has only been 
possible to sketch here, helps to explain the diversity of the modern 
definitions of the term. In the absence of an agreed definition, apart from 
the broadest 'writing on art,' each critic is able, effectively, to redefine the 
term to suit his or her interests and to fit the corpus of works chosen as 
representative. Definitions of ekphrasis are thus in danger of becoming (like 
Keats' urn) circular. 
One response might be to invent a range of new terms, like Peter 
Wagner's 'intermediality', to correspond to the range of connotations 
currently attached to 'ekphrasis.'4
I I would welcome such a move, as 


── PAGE 13 ──
someone whose main field of interest is the ancient sense and context of 
the term. But there would be wider advantages in removing the illusion 
of antiquity from what is essentially a modern coinage. For however 
divergent the modern definitions of ekphrasis are on the surface, they all 
have in common the fact that they are modern and are predicated direcdy 
or indirecdy on a certain set of assumptions about description in particular 
and about texts in general: the perceived dichotomy between description 
and narration; the association of description with the passive object; a 
conception of literature as a text to be treated as an object of study rather 
than as a transcription of oral performance which, even in its written 
form, can work a powerful effect upon a reader. In denying the possibility 
of a verbal representation of reality, poststructuralist reactions to positivist 
ideals of 'realistic' or 'truthful' description still preserve the dichotomy 
between object and action and still, ironically yet inevitably, focus on the 
absent 'reality.' From this perspective, Barthes' account of ekphrasis as a 
'detachable fragment, an end in itself' is not so far away from the 'art for 
art's sake' of the previous century. 
Ekphrasis as defined in the ancient rhetorical sources is based on a 
different set of assumptions that are as far removed from naive realism as 
they are from the coldly analytical formulae of a critic like Philippe 
Hamon.42 The rhetoricians speak freely of the psychological impact of the 
word and the imaginative contribution of the listener. Yet theirs is an 
imagination bounded by cultural tradition, by the collective memory of 
an educated elite. Verbal representation thus aims only at verisimilitude, 
an impression of truth, and seeks only to evoke a relatively restricted range 
of culturally significant images. Ancient discussions of verbal representa-
tion -
enargeia, hyporyposis, ekphrasis -
thus side-step the problem of whether 
language can or should represent reality by assuming that words appeal 
instead to the mental impressions left by perception. 
This interpretation of ekphrasis is far away from Keats' Urn. But although 
it raises some rather different issues from those usually associated with the 
term -
mental images rather than works of art, word as dynamic force 
rather than object or tool of interpretation -
it deserves attention in its 
own right if only because it reminds one of the profound differences 
between our ways of thinking about such questions and those current in 
antiquity, differences which are only obscured by the invented tradition 
of a genre of ekphrasis spanning Western literature from Homer to Keats 
and beyond. 
18 
RUTH WEBB 
42 - Philippe Hamon, Du descriptif(Paris, 
1993)· 
