# The Ekphrasis of Abstract Paintings through Oulipo and Other Critical Techniques
# Source: WIP 10 08.pdf
# BibTeX key: wright_ekphrasis_2024
# Zotero dir: 3112
# Extracted chars: 54968
# Format: PDF
============================================================

── PAGE 2 ──
Writing in Practice vol. 10 • 99
The Ekphrasis of Abstract Paintings 
through Oulipo and Other Critical 
Techniques
Patrick Wright
Abstract:
This article emerges from a larger project: to develop new modes of responding, in 
ways that might be understood as ekphrastic, to modern and especially abstract 
works of art. It posits different ways of looking, in contrast with the poet believing 
that they know where to look and what is to be considered important. I want to 
emphasise the point that unknowing can be a creative device. Methodologically, I 
draw on Georges Perec and art historian Giovanni Morelli. What they have in 
common is a concern for how attention is directed and how to cultivate methods that 
enable an even or free-floating perception, where all elements of the image are given 
equal weight. Employing a pedagogic approach (where my poem might focus on 
trifling or marginal details, or show other ways of looking), and procedural and 
Oulipo techniques, I demonstrate an innovative mode of ekphrasis.
Keywords: ekphrasis; modern; art; poetry; image; abstraction; subjectivity 
Elizabeth Bergmann Loizeaux observes that “images are more urgent [for poets] in the 
twentieth century than ever before” owing to what W.J.T. Mitchell called the “pictorial 
turn”, “from a culture of words into a culture of images that began in the late 
nineteenth century” (Loizeaux 2008: 2-3; Mitchell 1995: 11-34). At the same time, while 
she identifies an upsurge in poets responding to art in a variety of modes, their 
prompt is usually one that pre-dates, often by some time, the major formal 
innovations associated with modern art, such as abstraction (Loizeaux 2008: 2-5). I 
acknowledge that, among the many and wide-ranging examples of ekphrasis during 
this period, there is a scepticism towards the artwork and how we should look at it, 
or, as Loizeaux writes, “a heightened emphasis on the provisional nature of the truth 
pictures convey […] a wariness, too, of the viewer’s ability to see ‘right,’ and of the 
illusion-making nature of art that further complicates the difference between ‘seem’ 
and ‘is’” (Loizeaux 2008: 23). Nevertheless, even though poets have toiled with the 
uncertainty of modernist images in the twentieth century and up to the present day, I 
notice that there remains a preference for figurative rather than abstract art.
I am aware that “figurative” and “abstract” are in no way a strict dichotomy and the 
region in between is highly nuanced (actually, there are many semi-figurative 
examples); thus, I want to clarify that by “abstract” I have in mind images with no 
trace of figures or the referential world, that are dominated by colour, brushstrokes, or 
formlessness. This might apply, then, to Mark Rothko’s Seagram murals or Kazimir 
Malevich’s Black Square (1915), but likewise to early precedents, such as J.M.W. 
Turner’s late and often considered “unfinished” seascapes.  
Barbara Guest, influenced by the principles of Abstract Expressionism, was able to 
find related and corresponding possibilities for poetry. A perceived rupture in the 


── PAGE 3 ──
100 • Writing in Practice vol. 10
Writing in Practice vol. 10 • 101
tradition of figuration, evinced in the 
paintings of Jackson Pollock, Willem de 
Kooning, and Franz Kline, led her to a 
poetry that “extended vertically, as well 
as horizontally”, and refused to “remain 
motionless within a linear structure” 
(Guest, in Ford and Winkfield 2006: 17). 
While this suggests direct engagement 
with an abstract image and re-presenting 
its formal attributes, poets responding to 
such artworks often move swiftly away 
from its surface. Instead, they tend to 
write about historical context, the 
biography of the artist, or their own life. 
Examples of this instinct to move away 
or outside the frame are: Jorie Graham, 
associating outwards, from the red of a 
Rothko’s colour field painting to the red 
of a bird in the speaker’s immediate 
vicinity (“For Mark Rothko” [1979: 85]); 
Tamar Yoseloff’s The City with Horns
(2011), where the social and cultural 
milieu around Pollock’s abstract 
canvases is the focus of her poems; 
Ocean Vuong’s “Untitled (Blue, Green, 
and Brown): oil on canvas: Mark Rothko: 
1952”, where, aside from the title, there 
is little in the poem that refers to 
Rothko’s painting (Vuong 2017: 47); or 
the poet can sometimes look to the space 
around the artwork, the gallery, or other 
images in the exhibition, and incorporate 
the visitors or staff. One instance of this 
is Gillian Clarke’s “The Rothko Room”: 
“In this, the last room after hours in the 
gallery, / a mesh diffuses London’s light 
and sound. / The Indian keeper nods to 
sleep, marooned / in a trapezium of 
black on red” (Clarke 1997: 106-107). 
Each time, the abstract image itself 
seems to be circumvented. 
Similarly, I have identified a gap in 
criticism on the ekphrasis of abstract art. 
It is likely that James Heffernan has 
figuration in mind when he puts 
forward the idea that ekphrasis is “the 
verbal representation of visual 
representation” (Heffernan 2004: 3). This 
bias is also implicit in the criticism of 
Mitchell and Murray Krieger (Mitchell 
1995; Krieger 1992), while Shahar Bram 
asserts that ekphrasis is “tied up with 
the mimetic tradition” (Bram 2006: 372). 
There has been a shift in recent decades 
from understanding ekphrasis as an act 
of representation to one of re-
presentation, or the production of a new 
work of art, resulting from the dynamic 
interaction between the poet and the 
image or artist (Kennedy 2012). 
However, even if poets are now more 
likely to think in terms of finding a 
“response” or “answers” to an image 
(rather than representation or 
description), they are still usually reliant 
on figures or narrative, even if this is 
partial or discreet (Brandon 2018). 
Accordingly, I would like to address the 
seeming evasion of the abstract image, 
and how to stay with this image, rather 
than (as is often the temptation) to move 
outside or beyond it. It may be the case 
that context is useful in the process and 
finds its way in, at some point, but I 
want to propose techniques to work 
against skirting the image in a way that 
is premature, where first we begin by 
looking with new and critical 
perspectives. Though such techniques 
can also be applied to figurative images, 
they are perhaps more easily utilized 
with artworks where we are unsure of 
what we are seeing, that are subject to 
guesswork and indecision, or lack 
critical consensus as to their meaning. 
And, despite our proclivity to find form 
(as attested by the experience of 
pareidolia), looking at a monochromatic 
painting, for example, makes overt the 
fact that we have no script to follow. The 
figure/ground distinction is vague or 
non-existent, and the image becomes a 
screen on which to project our 
interpretations. 
The new ways of looking I propose have 
emerged from my reading of existing 
scholarship. James Heffernan 
understands ekphrasis as a “paragonal 
… contest between rival modes of 
representation: between the driving 
force of the narrating word and the 
stubborn resistance of the fixed image” 
(Heffernan 2004: 6). Finding this too 
restrictive and emblematic of what 
David Kennedy refers to as the 
“representational model” of ekphrasis, I 
am persuaded, like him, to think more in 
terms of an “encounter” between word 
and image, opposed to rivalry or 
competition (Kennedy 2012; Kennedy 
and Meek 2019). So too, my idea of an 
encounter is inspired by Camille Guthrie 
who cites Barbara Guest’s meditation on 
Juan Gris in “Roses” and Kevin Young’s 
“Cadillac Moon” (Guest 2016 [1973]: 128; 
Young 2003: 10). For Guthrie the 
relationship between poet and artist is 
not adversarial: it is based on “an 
interaction that doesn’t require a 
winner… It revels in the image, even if 
the artwork is ironic, a spectacle. It asks, 
it reveals, it wonders” (Guthrie 2013).
With Guthrie’s understanding in mind, I 
would like to develop ekphrastic modes 
that begin with a stance of humility and 
openness, allowing ourselves to be 
receptive and let the image guide our 
looking experience. This is because 
knowledge can be an obstacle in 
producing new writing: it can direct 
attention in a way that limits the scope 
of what can be perceived. As an 
alternative, I suggest an “unknowing” 
approach, which means looking at the 
artwork without imposing preconceived 
ideas or laying stress on certain 
signifiers. Similar to how a 
psychoanalyst can listen to a client’s 
speech with evenly dispersed attention, 
without assuming the meanings or 
weight of words and phrases, it is 
possible to view an image in a way 
where everything is perceived as having 
equal value. For Wilfred Bion this meant 
“the capacity to forget, the ability to 
eschew desire and understanding” (Bion 
1970: 51-52). Though this attitude of 
mind can be challenging, and the viewer 
might still be swayed by prior or 
supplementary knowledge of what 
should be deemed important, it can 
yield new insights or perspectives on the 
image.
Regardless of the approach or the kind 
of artwork the poet works with, we must 
deal with what we already know about 
the image, the artist, and other poems 
with the same or a similar prompt. This 
calls to mind Paul Hetherington and 
Cassandra Atherton’s idea of 
“ekphrastic inheritance”: “when a writer 
composes a new ekphrastic poem while 
cognisant of previously published 
ekphrastic poetry on the same artwork. 
In such cases, the previous poems 
become part of the ekphrastic tradition 
informing the new poem” (Hetherington 
and Atherton 2023: 16). This “knowing” 
approach can result in a recurrence of 
tropes or bringing well-travelled motifs 
to the fore; and this is the subject of 
satire in Julia Deakin’s “After Rothko”. 
In this poem, clichés are pronounced 
only to be denied in the style of via 
negativa: “This is not the night sky, 
teeming with more than we know. / 
This is not the abyss. Not a black hole. 
Not unremitting black” (Deakin 2018: 
77). Such inheritance can allow us to see 
art in a way that is reflexive or ironic; not 
disavowing what we know but writing 
through it. Yet, the time is ripe for a 
methodology that may help us to see 
new and familiar images with fresh eyes.
I have thus furthered ways of working 
with or subverting what I know of 
paintings in a way that brings about new 
insights into the self, ekphrastic modes, 
and inventiveness in poetry. Indeed, 
though I agree with John Hollander and 
George Raitt in casting doubt on 
whether ekphrasis illuminates the 
image, and poetry arrives at a 
supplementary “truth” about artworks 
(Hollander 1988: 209), I think that poetry 
can illuminate the experience of seeing, 
the writing process, and the writer who 
sees. Raitt makes this distinction, and 
the important point that the poet 
responding to visual art can allow 
meaning to emerge at the limits of 
signification (Raitt 2006: 14-26). To do so, 
the poet needs to restrain from believing 
that they know what they are seeing or 
where to look. While it is impossible to 
view the artwork without any 
knowledge whatsoever, I proceed with 
the argument that new ways of writing 
about abstract art can be expanded 
through alternative ways of looking and 
critical techniques of engagement.
In what follows, I present strategies for 
steering my attention away from what I 
assume to be of vital importance in the 
image. This also means outlining the 
ways in which different modes of poetic 
ekphrasis can lead me away from where 
my lyric “I” might take me; how by 
prohibiting some ways of looking, I 
facilitate others. I draw then on the 


── PAGE 4 ──
102 • Writing in Practice vol. 10
Writing in Practice vol. 10 • 103
Oulipo school and procedural methods 
(Motte 1986; Conte 1991), while 
suggesting that a systematic or rule-
based approach could be one way of 
dealing with the ekphrasis of abstract 
images. I also examine how a more 
deliberate use of critical writing on 
images can alter my lyric habits, direct 
my awareness to seemingly insignificant 
details, marginalia, or the paratext. This 
can provide new ideas and language to 
work with, resulting in a poem that 
looks different from what I usually 
write. One example is the effect of 
collaging texts or quotations together. 
The idea of a found text (at least as a 
starting point) is thus discussed, along 
with the cento form. 
My proclivity to take flight from the 
image can be seen as part of a 
contemporary interest in moving 
beyond representation or testing its 
limits. I have been motivated in this 
endeavour by my reading of Anne 
Carson, Emily Berry, and Deryn Rees-
Jones — poets who, through their 
ekphrasis, do not gesture to figures or 
narrative. Instead, the prompt is used to 
generate the poem (as formally 
analogous, as a source of inspiration, as 
a metaphor for lyric themes, and so on) 
(Carson 1998, 2006; Berry 2017; Rees-
Jones 2012). Simultaneously, I am 
inspired by poems like Moniza Alvi’s “I 
Would Like to be a Dot in a Painting by 
Miró”: to include the lyric within my 
experiments with form and to promote 
ways of seeing which might be 
considered subjective (Alvi 2008 [1993]: 
20). Rather than begin with or studiously 
incorporate knowledge of the artwork, I 
associate Alvi’s poem with poets in the 
habit of trying to look naïvely or 
playfully misperceiving what the artist 
intended. Another example is Susan 
Fealy’s “Gouache, Sheep Skulls, Fence 
Bracket”. She writes: “Look closer. / The 
skulls are singing, / More like bird-
beaks than sheep” (Fealy 2017). 
Like other poets responding to 
modernist art, such as Tamar Yoseloff in 
The City with Horns and Mary Oliver (see 
her poem “Franz Marc’s Blue Horses”), I 
often rely on biographical or historical 
details to compensate for the absence of 
referents (Yoseloff 2011; Oliver 2014: 43). 
In “Nocturne”, for example, I employ 
description and have recourse to the 
imagination and wider milieu. I was 
inspired by Charles Simic’s Dime-store 
Alchemy (2011) and Pascale Petit’s What 
the Water Gave Me (2013). In these 
ekphrastic collections, while there is still 
occasional reference to a figure or object 
(in the work of Joseph Cornell and Frida 
Kahlo, respectively), the art serves as a 
springboard for the poet to make use of 
extraneous content, such as biography, 
history, or literary context In “Nocturne” 
(based upon Whistler’s simplified 
composition, tonal relationships, and 
atmospheric effects), I move from 
reflections prior to research in the first 
stanza (“Over the Thames are ghost 
trails of rockets / reflecting like stars on 
the water’s edge”) towards a more 
“knowing” attitude vis-à-vis the 
painting, after having read about it, in 
the final stanza (“In the courtroom, it 
was hung upside down”): 
Nocturne
After James McNeill Whistler 
Over the Thames are smoke trails of rockets
reflecting like stars on the water’s edge — 
cinders showering down, a Rorschach test. 
They say this is a cause to celebrate: 
the paint vague, stirring the mind’s 
slideshow —
dabs of green, yellow. They double, cascade, 
coalesce into a Manhattan by night.
Or are they strip-lights seen through fabric?
Much begins with deliberate accidents.
Spectators gaze, blinkered by their habits.
Pale to themselves, not quite transparent. 
In the courtroom, it was hung upside down.
To counter my instinct to move outside 
the abstract image and reach for context, 
I put into action strategies that allow me 
to stay inside the frame, at least to 
produce a first draft. With Rothko’s 
murals in mind, it is easy to move away 
from the canvas and assume there is 
little to describe or respond to beyond 
colour. I understand this in contrast with 
figurative works such as Bruegel’s 
Landscape with the Fall of Icarus (1560), 
where my eyes are drawn in towards the 
ploughman, the sun, the ship, and so 
forth. This could be due to several 
factors, such as knowledge of the 
painting and the “ekphrastic 
inheritance” of well-known poems that 
have instilled partial bias. W.H. Auden’s 
“Musée des Beaux Arts” (2007: 57) and 
William Carlos Williams’s “Landscape 
with the Fall of Icarus” (2000: 212) are 
canonical examples, the latter 
underscoring the key visual features: 
“Icarus”, the “farmer”, and the “sea”.
To bypass or at least become aware of 
my visual prejudices I explore free-
floating or evenly dispersed attention. 
This includes an effort to look closely at 
the image over time, bracketing 
preconceptions, not knowing where 
figure and ground are situated, where 
the focal point is, what is central and 
peripheral, and so on. I have thus read 
the Oulipo poets, whom I see as 
advancing ways of looking that are 
“flat” or even and open to the possibility 
that everything in the visual field could 
be of interest or the locus of meaning. 
Particularly apt is Georges Perec’s 
proposal in his essay “The Street”: 
Note down what you can see. 
Anything worthy of note going on. 
Do you know how to see what’s 
worthy of note? Is there anything 
that strikes you? Nothing strikes 
you. You don’t know how to see… 
You must set about it more slowly, 
almost stupidly. Force yourself to 
write down what is of no interest, 
what is most obvious, most common, 
most colourless (Perec 2008: 46-56). 
I have also repurposed the thoughts of 
nineteenth-century art historian and 
critic Giovanni Morelli. His attitude to 
looking involved observing clues in 
trifling details (an ear or hand for 
instance) rather than in composition, 
narrative, and subject matter, which 
would likely be the foci for students, 
copyists, or imitators. As Carlo Ginzburg 
explains, the Morellian method involves 
working like a “detective”, “discovering, 
from clues unnoticed by others, the 
author in one case of a crime, in the 
other of a painting” (Ginzburg 1980: 8). 
As such, the artist’s identity is 
paradoxically disclosed most reliably in 
details least attended to. In my writing, I 
am less concerned about the artist’s 
identity. Instead, the method I describe 
helps to shift my focus away from what I 
assume are the significant components 
of the artwork and towards the parts to 
which I had not yet attributed meaning. 
Other than myself, at least one poet has 
looked to apply such a strategy to 
abstract art. Liz Cashdan, observing her 
tendency to “find representations of 
objects” in Angela Baum’s abstract 
paintings, regards my approach of 
“seeing flatly” as innovative and has 
successfully re-utilized it within her 
series of poetic responses (Cashdan 
2019). Here, like in my poems, elements 
in the image are itemised in the poem in 
a way that appears disinterested. I found 
this deceptively “objective” recording 
useful in galleries, where my attention 
span was rather short (if my interest was 
not piqued). Additionally, even when 
time and attention were given to the act 
of seeing, my visual literacy skills were 
at times impeding. My knowledge of 
where or how to look, particularly 
regarding composition, modelling, or 
the picture plane, resulted in 
overlooking certain details, such as 
marginalia or curios. This led me to 
ponder whether these aspects (those 
originally missed), rather than figures or 
narrative, could serve as the wellspring 
of a poem.
I tried to look at what I assumed were 
insignificant or trivial marks when 
viewing first-hand the work of Hughie 
O’Donoghue and Henry Moore at the 
Whitworth Art Gallery, but I later 
rejected these as disinterested exercises. 
My initial thought was to arrange to 
view the images privately in the hope 
that distraction would be kept to a 
minimum (e.g., background chatter). But 
I later found inspiration in the unwanted 
stimuli. The space itself, whether in the 
research room or in the holdings, offered 


── PAGE 5 ──
104 • Writing in Practice vol. 10
Writing in Practice vol. 10 • 105
additional points of interest, such as a 
sense of surveillance. The in-situ
experience was, however, only 
successful in producing a first draft; and 
I was naïve in my belief that under such 
conditions my focus on the artwork 
would be intensified. I now see this as a 
conceptual stage through which subtle 
details emerged, and in later revisions I 
re-integrated personal themes. 
Sina Queyras writes how the ekphrastic 
poet “doesn’t … try to read a painting 
from the top left corner, describing it 
square by square the way an artist might 
have blocked it in”, but she then goes on 
to wonder “what that would be like” 
(Queyras 2010). I have also been directed 
by my reading of Cole Swensen, who, as 
Kenneth Goldsmith notes, has tried to 
“get beyond the ‘emotions recollected in 
tranquillity’ paradigm.” She sees this as 
what “conceptual poetry” in its widest 
sense looks to accomplish. For Swensen, 
in fields of visuality, the ways in which 
we see and “read” have not changed 
much, based, as they are, on the primary 
figure/ground distinction. What has 
changed is the subject matter:
Increasingly, the visual arts and some 
poetry have worked to distil subject 
matter so that core structural 
elements and their dynamics are laid 
bare or at least made much more 
apparent. But it seems that the visual 
arts have been more successful at this 
than poetry, and in part, it is because, 
after a very promising start 
[translating cubism’s geometric and 
perspectival shifts into writing], 
poetry took a turn which confused 
distillation with simplification, 
turning away from that which would 
expose underlying dynamics apparent 
through rhythm, echo, and 
juxtaposition, and towards simpler 
language, where “simpler” was 
understood to be both “clearer” and 
“truer,” with the result being poetic 
language dominated by subject matter 
(Swensen, in Goldsmith 2008). 
I like how Swensen posits 
that “ekphrasis as a tool can help poetry 
by historically analysing how the visual 
arts have achieved this” (Goldsmith 
2008). I understand “this” as referring to 
how modernist art has been successful, 
through techniques of abstraction, to 
emphasise and make overt its formal 
construction. Moreover, with the images 
I have in mind, “form” can be 
indistinguishable from “content” (the 
figure/ground distinction collapsing). 
Thus, ekphrasis can be a re-presentation 
of the formal elements of the image, 
without looking to reduce the poem to 
subject matter. Recognizing an affinity 
with Swensen and linking her 
evaluation with my own interest in 
answering to the forms of abstract art, I 
applied the idea implied by Queyras. I 
started by placing a grid over a painting 
by Wassily Kandinsky, then studied each 
section in turn, cataloguing elements in a 
systematic manner. 
Given the degree of nebulousness, I was 
led to respond pareidolically to each 
part, seeing for instance “a ladybird in 
disguise”, “a snail on the pavement”, 
and a “black swan”. Initially, I gave six 
sections of the painting equal treatment 
and engaged in freewriting activities 
(provoking the aforementioned images). 
I discovered that my written 
observations were incongruous, though 
were ultimately brought together under 
a unifying lyric theme (like in my poem 
“Abstraction”, below). 
I then played with swapping phrases 
around, corresponding with the formal 
arrangement of the image. 
I also recalled the Comte de 
Lautréamont’s statement: how such 
juxtapositions are often as “beautiful as 
the chance meeting on a dissecting-table 
of a sewing-machine and an umbrella” 
(Ducasse 1953 [1869]: 327). I began by 
seeing the picture as though anything 
could be as exciting as anything else. 
Soon, however, some parts became more 
alluring, and my openness to finding 
unintended forms and shapes meant 
that any narrative I imposed was 
illogical. My poem only emerged when I 
began to write in a lyric mode, taking 
the parts I mis-perceived and weaving a 
more personal theme around them. 
What I retain in the final version is a 
tabulated form, a schema that is 
suggestive of a canvas with no centre, 
that has several foci which are also 
coordinated:
Abstraction 
Alongside Alma Thomas
the greatest truths I’ve found are 
that god is a ladybird in disguise
                                                    Hades will 
remain mute to my protests
after the apocalypse I must nail 
meaning down through inscape
                                                    the choice to 
go on living arrives  
when I feel vertigo over a cliff  
                                                 the sound of 
immanence can be heard 
as the rain blitzkriegs my glass
                                                 one meaning 
of martyr is to bear witness
when I save a snail on the pavement 
I save humanity
                                                at least Christ 
only had one crucifixion
I need a ghost in the machine 
science is just a line of paradigms 
I need my black swans and white crows
                                                                my 
words must serve as a requiem 
love is beyond Aristotle’s categories
                                                          all these 
are variations on a theme
Looking to undo standard dichotomies 
of figure/ground, centre/margins, and 
form/content required practice and 
inspired unorthodox methods. For 
example, I rotated some artworks 
sideways or turned them upside down: 
simple actions in themselves, yet highly 
effective ways to defamiliarize the 
artwork and subvert expressive modes. 
This was easier with abstract or 
“formless” artworks, such as Turner’s 
final seascapes. With these, I began by 
shuffling and reshuffling a set of 
postcard reproductions on the surface of 
a table: creating new images and 
simulating a personally curated 
“exhibition”. Deidre Lynch links this 
method and my poem (below) with the 
“scenic myriorama: a parlor amusement 
from the 1820s, which was touted to its 
purchasers as being the source in potentia
of a multitude of landscapes” (Lynch 
2024: 4-5): 
Imaginary Museum 
On this Sunday autumnal morning
I arrange a set of postcards on the table’s
surface — all Turners from the 1840s
with billowing waves and detonating suns.
 
I juxtapose them in ways entirely my 
own —
 
I rotate them in the style of a gyre: 
 
the ships and shorelines disappearing 
 
till all that’s left is one big creation 
myth —
 
 
like how once everything we 
know 
 
 
was crammed inside the size of 
a dice.
 
 
All this at some remove from 
the Clore
 
 
with its taut ropes and 
exclusion zones. 
 
 
 
Under my hands I see 
the paint sail 
 
 
 
outwards and into the 
grain — the edges 
 
 
 
fizzling away and 
atmospheres escaping
 
 
 
into the larger lozenge: 
the place of prayer.
I also tried adopting a Martian attitude, 
which relied on a state of negative 
capability, making things strange, or 
“resting in doubts and uncertainties” 
(Keats 1958 [1817]: 193-194). In doing so, 
however, I found that I was still 
applying knowledge to my poems. 
Indeed, I distinguish my dispersed 
attention tactics from the Martian poets 
and how they immediately saw objects 
as “foreign”. In Craig Raine’s “A 
Martian Sends a Postcard Home”, books 
are “Caxtons” and “mechanical birds 


── PAGE 6 ──
106 • Writing in Practice vol. 10
Writing in Practice vol. 10 • 107
with many wings” (Raine 2000 [1979]: 
95-96). This poem could be said to 
belong to a romantic tradition: returning 
to a child-like perception of the world. 
Though the Martian poets were 
projecting personal content (“Caxtons” 
and “mechanical birds” are not 
“objective”; they say something about 
the poet), my initial phase usually 
involves procedural rules. Rather than 
have, from the beginning, the 
imagination in operation, a system helps 
to avoid making the image a screen for 
fantasy (at least initially).  
I find that employing a system works 
against my ego-based habits and the 
aspect of the lyric mode that emphasizes 
personal themes. Eschewing the 
romantic myth of “innocent” vision or 
finding a deeper truth, I embraced the 
postmodern tenet that I can only 
represent another mediation of what I 
see and can never gain access to the 
image in itself (outside of language or 
cultural frameworks) (Jay 1994: 8). 
Though I will always see by way of 
lenses, it has been crucial to draw 
attention to these while looking at how 
they might be exchanged for others. But 
I find it necessary to re-introduce a lyric 
element in my final poems (if there has 
been an initial phase of self-effacement). 
Not only are aspects of my life always 
present to some extent (whether I like it 
or not), inserting these into my poem 
gives it an emotional core.
An example of the approach I outline is 
“Black Square”: a poem based on 
Kazimir Malevich’s painting of the same 
title (below). I chose this image because 
it has no clear figures or centre; as such, 
the principal areas of focus are 
prohibited, and I am forced to look for 
details I do not normally seek out. I am 
faced with an image characterised by 
flatness, aside from physical properties 
such as the frame, the brushstrokes, the 
texture, and so on. 
With Perec’s method I became aware 
that, in terms of surface area, white is 
just as prevalent as black. The title is also 
misleading: the picture is not black but 
contains a sprinkling of colours (“Closer 
… this is only a semblance of black”). 
Neither is the painting a square: this fact 
is in plain sight (though we might not 
notice it at first and may need a critical 
source to point it out). These initial 
impressions, after looking “stupidly” as 
Perec suggests, shaped the form of my 
eventual poem. It looks like a slightly 
distorted square with use of lineation 
and space: the borders of the image 
determine the line breaks of the poem.
 The white space around the words hints 
at traces of hues and craquelure; while 
the space around my poem’s edges 
signifies the white bezel that surrounds 
the “black” centre. I have considered the 
size of the margins, and these are just as 
important as the words and are a vital 
part of the poem. It is a “hybrid” poem, 
as Hetherington and Atherton read it, 
which employs aspects of the prose 
poem while combining these with the 
concrete poem’s deployment of the right 
margin (Hetherington and Atherton 
2020: 161-62). Aside from the formal 
aspects, much of the poem is concerned 
with seeing flatly. I noticed my reflection 
in the glass covering the artwork, which 
tempted me to write about myself in a 
way that increased self-awareness. 
Though I wanted to resist this, and I 
announce: “I don’t want to see myself 
seeing back, not seeing black” despite 
my call to “see flatly, the way Freud 
listened”, I reveal my angst in what the 
blackness evokes (“the starlessness 
between galaxies”) and how “sense 
deprivation” gives rise to forms in 
obscurity (e.g., a running “buffalo”). 
Likewise, I notice my associations 
outside the canvas (Gallipoli, 
Suprematism, Russian icons, or 
references to Dostoyevsky’s The Idiot) 
(Dostoyevsky 2008 [1869]: 228-229). The 
formal aspects of the poem contain the 
imaginative leaps, while my questions 
express doubts (in contrast to the 
assumed academic authority of art 
historians). While my poem is, in part, a 
reflection on the failure of the 
disinterested attitude I began with, my 
questioning seeks to elaborate what I see 
in terms of unknowing (as defined 
earlier). The accuracy of my recollections 
is unimportant, giving a fictive and 
notional quality to the final poem: 
Black Square
After Kazimir Malevich 
In this light      the surface is a black mirror    
I don’t want to see
myself seeing back    not seeing black     
Behind cut glass a black
cat in a coal bunker       fur curled in a 
corner     Learn to see flat
see flatly        the way Freud listened       
Does matt paint glisten
a sea-creature?         or is this Vantablack          
sense deprivation
an anechoic chamber?       The only sound is 
the nervous system
heart hurtling inside my cranium         Here 
I see the starlessness
between galaxies         the black        of 
nothing quite happening
of consciousness closing     fastening     
Could this be a Madonna
and Child    figures excised      (Suprematist 
and still       a mother
and child)?          This black          has a dead 
Christ uncanniness
(Holbein’s panel for Prince Myshkin)          
This is also Gallipoli
field artillery (out into history)   Closer    
this is only a semblance
of black              a rainbow             the web of 
a shattered phone
A buffalo  torso  legs    a head hurrying 
towards some wilderness
Another method was to make use of free 
association over successive viewings. 
This led to a series of poems divided 
into numbered stanzas. I made use of the 
temporal device (seeing the image at 
different times) to work against the idea 
of a unified, humanist model of the self 
and what Swensen sees, succeeding 
Wordsworth, as the “emotions 
recollected in tranquillity paradigm” 
(Swensen, in Goldsmith 2008; 
Wordsworth 1989 [1801]: 73). Pursuing 
this rule, neglected details are brought to 
the fore. By unknowing what I am 
seeing, re-discovering the image with 
each viewing, I become aware of other 
particulars. 
Although prior knowledge can be an 
obstacle in producing new writing, I also 
see potential in becoming more 
cognizant of how critical writing can 
have an auxiliary role in the poetry-
making process, as I will now illustrate. 
The distinctiveness of modern, 
especially abstract, art lies in how its 
meaning often depends on critics, 
theorists, or art historians. The discourse 
surrounding the image or object not only 
informs our viewing but also plays an 
integral role in defining the artwork 
(Krauss 1986: 162). Thus, my ekphrasis 
can sometimes be understood as a 
triangular relationship between image, 
poem, and criticism — where the last 
item subverts what I know (or think I 
know) about the image. The knowledge 
I imbibe through critical texts can then 
be employed during a phase of 
freewriting or assembling a preliminary 
draft. Examples include how an essay on 
an artwork might be incorporated into 
my poem, responding to a quotation, 
distilling ideas in an exhibition 
catalogue, or the use of the paratext. If 
my initial draft has an academic tone, I 
will subsequently blend this with a 
personal engagement.  
One case here is my poem “Portrait of 
Katherine Mansfield” (below). Notes 
were first gleaned through a visual 
analysis of a portrait by Anne Rice, then 
through commentaries by art historians 
and critics. This has been useful as a 
technique during my first phase of 
writing. I was inspired by the cento 
form, since this demonstrated how a 
poem could be constructed in fragments 
and cobbled together in a way that 
produces meaning and elicits new 
insights. This involved collating and 
condensing quotations and phrases, 
rearranging and editing them, which 
then became a spur for a second phase of 
writing. My re-ordering is inspired by 
collage and is a way of linking my 
poems with the spirit of Modernism. 
This is evident in my poem on 
Mansfield:
Portrait of Katherine Mansfield
Alongside Anne Rice 
I never dreamt of coughing blood the colour 


── PAGE 7 ──
108 • Writing in Practice vol. 10
Writing in Practice vol. 10 • 109
of this dress. 
Nor spending the English winters abroad. I 
only dreamt 
of ending stories abruptly, using words the 
way a cello rises 
and falls. As a girl my dreams were an atlas. 
To escape windy
Wellington, leave on a liner, find my fictive 
home. I wrote 
of jazzy palettes, low-neck bohemian garb. 
How life could 
be all syntax, experiment. From Wilde’s 
prose and a Maori 
breast, I adored the fetish, torn between 
gestalt and imago. 
My red dress fills most of the canvas. As an 
émigré, I’d share 
a cigarette, strut in a kimono. At parties, I’d 
laud suffragettes 
or write vignettes in bold strokes like the 
Fauves. Aroused, 
I’d return from the colonies, my personas 
piling like a house 
of cards. I’d be polyamorous, endless rhythm. 
I’d embody 
the fleeting and contingent. In the end, I’d 
ride a falling star.
In this instance the form can be 
construed as a prose poem that resists 
narrative. Sentences are provided as 
statements of equal bearing, resembling 
the flatness of Rice’s canvas. 
I began in medias res, suggesting no 
single focus. Parataxis and vivid 
imagery were employed to parallel the 
vibrant colours of the Fauvist style. I 
opted to experiment with dramatic 
monologue; I speak in the voice of 
Mansfield and make use of 
prosopopoeia, as if she were speaking 
from a moment after her death. I did so 
to subvert my lyric voice, which, by this 
point, I felt had become too predictable. I 
saw the techniques I was developing as 
a means of writing poems that looked 
like someone else had written them. This 
can feel like a creative achievement, and 
it often comes about as an effect of 
unknowing the artwork in the way I 
describe (along with relinquishing 
elements of my style or identity) and 
integrating other sources in the process.     
Particularly valuable has been initial 
research into images, artists, or ways of 
looking, which then suggested 
alternative points of view, a precise 
lexicon, or an unintentional ekphrasis by 
a critic, which functioned as a starting 
point for my poems. While, as I have 
said, my eyes are often directed or 
certain signifiers are privileged, critical 
writing has illuminated parts of the 
image that I had not yet seen or could
not see. This includes criticism that reads 
the life of the artist or how they worked. 
John Ashbery’s “Self-Portrait in a 
Convex Mirror” has set up a precedent 
in this regard, since it provides a 
meditation on Parmigianino’s working 
methods and Mannerist ways of looking 
(Ashbery 2007 [1975]: 68-83).
My poem “Lessons on How to View a 
Mondrian” has similar (though less 
ambitious) aims. I began with a blog 
article on Mondrian by James Elkins, 
which I stripped down to prominent 
phrases. Next, I focused on the line, 
paying attention to cadence and rhythm, 
cutting words, and using synonyms 
when internal rhyme was possible. I 
then re-ordered lines, again looking for 
rhyme, but also to convey skittishness 
and disjunction. The process of 
adaptation went on until I had a first 
draft. Here the poem emerges out of a 
pre-existing text and the dynamic is 
triangular rather than dualistic: my 
poem fuses my own idiosyncratic way of 
looking at the image with observations 
imparted by the critic (Elkins 2010). I 
end with lines that comment on the 
seemingly more comprehensible activity 
of a painter in comparison to that of a 
poet, like Frank O’Hara’s “Why I Am 
Not a Painter” (2005 [1957]: 112):
Lessons on How to View a Mondrian 
First glance simple, though it’s a 
masquerade.
Off-white, black stripes, pale lemon. The 
canvas
is the whole universe, with nothing beyond 
it.
Stop and a world unfurls from a bud: 
scarabs,
teeth, X-rays, halos. Luscious surfaces, 
rubbed
to a weave. At the borders of stripes, they 
aren’t
just lines where black meets white or blue or
yellow. At the cordon you’ll see how he’s 
changed
his mind. If you bend down, look up against 
the
light, it shows the warp and weft at forty-
five
degrees to stripes. A closer look shows a 
stairway
of paint. In some parts, there’s been no paper 
to
guide him. He’s kept his hand from 
wavering,
joyed in the tremble and feints. When you 
put
up an easel in a museum, everyone talks to 
you.
If you sit and write a poem, nobody 
does.
I have also been led to work this way 
through my reading of Anne Carson, 
especially in what is often called “the 
lyric essay”. Her work “The Glass 
Essay”, for instance, can be seen as a 
poetic form marked by lineation and 
organised in tercets and quatrains 
(Carson 1995: 1-38). 
This form is open to experimentation 
and often comprises what Lia Purpura 
understands as “provisional responses” 
as opposed to certitude (consistent with 
the questioning attitude I set out earlier) 
(Purpura 2007: 97). Polyvocality and 
code-switching may also feature, and I 
value how these techniques enable a 
personal or objective tone, even within 
the same poem. 
I am working, then, within an 
established postmodern lineage of poets 
writing critically and self-reflexively 
about images and/or the act of 
representation. Again, in this context, I 
have Ashbery’s “Self-Portrait in a 
Convex Mirror” in mind. While my 
poems focus on abstract or modernist 
artworks, I have found Ashbey’s poem 
useful when writing in a way that is 
open about my act of looking and the 
process by which I work. This can often 
occur on site, while I look at the image 
and record my techniques of looking in a 
notebook. This is important as a 
generative strategy, and when revised 
into a poem the result can resemble an 
ars poetica, one that reflects on my 
thoughts and concerns (e.g., “Black 
Square”). “Ars Ekphrasis” (inspired by a 
poem of that title by Paul T. Corrigan 
[2019]) is another example. This has 
Turner’s late seascapes in mind, but it 
also serves as a condensation of my 
larger project.
Ars Ekphrasis
Is my subject broad or specific? Does it 
include dreams? Does my focus extend to 
scenes of sketching by the sea & things in 
galleries? Can it evoke prints yet to exist? 
Should I say ‘abstract’, ‘liminal’, ‘non-
figurative’, ‘colour field’? Are such pictures 
even finished? A key question seems to be: 
Does spending long on detail suggest 
illness? Is it perverse to spend time with 
shadows? Should my poems be written 
in sittings? Do I forbid words & efface the 
trick? Is the world there to interpret? Is the 
author dead or merely asleep? Is a poem a 
provisional system? Might I write theory 
elegantly & done in a few syllables? Should I 
care if there never was a Shield of Achilles? 
Should I have fun playing with the partial & 
indistinct? Do I see cloud patterns or draw 
ovals in sand? If I find a border, is this 
happenstance?
To conclude, I have presented different 
ways of looking. These are: looking as 
free-floating or evenly dispersed 
attention; observing clues in trifling 
details (an ear or hand for instance) 
rather than in composition, narrative, or 
subject matter; looking in a way that 
seeks to undo the standard dichotomies 
of figure/ground, centre/margins, and 
form/content; seeing the artwork over 
successive viewings; and regarding the 
critical discourse surrounding the image 
as integral to it, and using this material 
as a way to direct or inform the ways in 
which I look. I see these as vital for poets 
to know and practice because they work 
against preconceptions or prior 


── PAGE 8 ──
110 • Writing in Practice vol. 10
Writing in Practice vol. 10 • 111
knowledge of what is or should be 
considered significant to the artwork. In 
other words, they can be useful in 
unknowing the image: to pave the way 
for new discoveries or highlight aspects 
that we might not have seen otherwise. 
Each tactic either subverts what we 
think we know or offers new 
perspectives as a way of inviting new 
modes of writing. These ways of looking 
can also overcome the idea that there is 
little to write about on the abstract 
image: the poet feeling stuck or limited. 
In such instances, they can act as a foil 
against the urge to reach for context or to 
project aspects of the self onto the 
artwork. 
Even if the latter is seen as desirable, the 
techniques I describe can warp or alter 
habitual or unconscious lyric impulses, 
such as reflexive distancing from the 
artwork. To stay with the image, at least 
for a while, allowing what and how we 
see to shape our poem (suggesting a 
dialogue with the artwork), can also 
affect the eventual form; and it is 
important to emphasise that in my 
poems, form and content are not a 
simple dichotomy. Formal rules are 
linked to content to the extent that this 
apparent dualism breaks down into a 
“system” or what is often understood as 
“procedural form” (Conte 1991). I set out 
initially to write in a way that was 
disinterested with the assumption that 
this would help transform my poetic 
voice. Not only did I find, however, that 
disinterestedness was difficult to attain, 
but I also found that it rarely led to a 
successful poem. What it did result in 
was a first draft that involved novel 
insights on abstract art; it was only after 
I revised this, though, with the lyric in 
mind (personal thoughts and feelings) 
that it felt like a meaningful poem. 
Likewise, as I pursued a system of 
procedural rules, I would eventually — 
like a Möbius loop — re-inscribe aspects 
of my identity in the process of self-
effacement. I do think though that it was 
first necessary to apply the techniques I 
have presented, and then, only then, to 
bring in personal themes (in the manner 
of a dialectic), to construct a different 
kind of ekphrastic poem. 
BIOGRAPHY
Patrick Wright has a poetry collection, 
Full Sight of Her (Eyewear), which was 
nominated for the John Pollard Prize. He 
has also been twice shortlisted for the 
Bridport Prize. His poems have 
appeared in Poetry Ireland, Poetry Wales, 
The North, Gutter, and London Magazine. 
He has a second collection, Exit Strategy, 
which is scheduled for publication by 
Broken Sleep Books in January, 2025. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Alvi, M. (2008) Split Word: Poems 1990-
2005. Northumberland: Bloodaxe Books.
Ashbery, J. (2007 [1975]) Self-portrait in a 
Convex Mirror. Manchester: Carcanet. 
Auden, W.H. (2007) Selected Poems. 
Edited by E. Mendelson. London: 
Vintage. 
Berry, E. (2017) Stranger, Baby. London: 
Faber and Faber. 
Bion, W. (1970) Attention and 
Interpretation. London: Tavistock. 
Bram, S. (2006) ‘Ekphrasis as a Shield: 
Ekphrasis and the Mimetic Tradition’, 
Word & Image, 22(4), October-December, 
pp. 372-378.
Brandon, J., Dautch, A. and Quraishi, S. 
(2018) ‘Poetic responses to Gustav 
Klimt’, Hay Festival, Saturday, 26 May. 
https://www.hayfestival.com/p-13760-
jo-brandon-aviva-dautch-shazea-
quraishi.aspx (Accessed: 3 June 2024)
Bruegel, P. (1560) Landscape with the Fall 
of Icarus. Royal Museums of Fine Arts of 
Belgium, Brussels. Available at: https://
artsandculture.google.com/story/
landscape-with-the-fall-of-icarus-royal-
museums-of-fine-arts-of-belgium/
ewUxXpmuNdcLJg?hl=en (Accessed: 11 
June 2024)
Carson, A. (1995) Glass, Irony, and God. 
New York: New Directions.
Carson, A. (1998) Men in the Off Hours. 
London: Jonathan Cape.
Carson, A. (2006) Decreation: Poetry, 
Essays, Opera. London: Jonathan Cape.
Cashdan, L. (2019) ‘Ekphrastic Poetry’, 
Open College of the Arts, Tuesday, 11 June. 
Available at: https://www.oca.ac.uk/
weareoca/creative-writing/ekphrastic-
poetry/?cn-reloaded=1 (Accessed: 3 
June 2024). 
Clarke, G. (1997) Collected poems. 
Manchester: Carcanet. 
Conte, J.M. (1991) Unending Design: The 
Forms of Postmodern Poetry. Ithaca, New 
York: Cornell University Press.
Corrigan, P.T. (2019) ‘Ars ekphrasis’, The 
Ekphrastic Review, Wednesday, 3 April. 
Available at: https://www.ekphrastic.
net/ekphrastic/ars-ekphrasis-by-paul-t-
corrigan (Accessed: 3 June 2024). 
Deakin, J. (2018) Sleepless. Scarborough: 
Valley Press.
Ducasse, I. (1953 [1869]) Les chants de 
Maldoror, in Oeuvres complétes: chants de 
Maldoror, poésies, lettres. Paris: Garnier-
Flammarion. 
Elkins, J. (2010) ‘How to look at 
Mondrian’, HuffPost. Available at: 
https://www.huffpost.com/entry/
post_1036_b_756669 (Accessed: 3 June 
2024). 
Fealy, S. (2017) ‘Gouache, sheep skulls, 
fence bracket’, Cordite Poetry Review, 
Ekphrastic, 79, Wednesday, 1 March. 
Available at: http://cordite.org.au/
poetry/ekphrastic/gouache-sheep-
skulls-fence-bracket/ (Accessed: 3 June 
2024). 
Ford, M. and Winkfield, T. (2006) (eds) 
The New York poets II: An Anthology. 
Manchester: Carcanet. 
Ginzburg, C. and Davin, A. (1980) 
‘Morelli, Freud, and Sherlock Holmes: 
Clues and Scientific Method’, History 
Workshop, 9, Spring, pp. 5-36. Available 
at: http:///users.clas.ufl.edu/burt/
filmphilology/
ginzburgmorellifreudholmes.pdf 
(Accessed: 3 June 2024). 
Goldsmith, K. (2008) ‘Conceptual 
Poetics: Cole Swensen’, Poetry 
Foundation, Wednesday, 4 June. Available 
at: https://www.poetryfoundation.org/
harriet-books/2008/06/conceptual-
poetics-cole-swensen (Accessed: 3 June 
2024). 
Guest, B. (2016) The Collected Poems of 
Barbara Guest. Edited by H.H. Guest. 
Middletown, Connecticut: Wesleyan 
University Press.
Guthrie, C. (2013) ‘Writing poetry about 
art’. The Poetry Foundation. Available at: 
https://www.poetryfoundation.org/
harriet/2013/04/writing-poetry-about-
art (Accessed: 3 June 2024).
Heffernan, J.W. (2004) Museum of Words: 
The Poetics of Ekphrasis from Homer to 
Ashbery. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
Hetherington, P. and Atherton, C. (eds) 
(2020) Prose Poetry: An Introduction. 
Princeton and Oxford: Princeton 
University Press. 
Hetherington, P. and Atherton, C. (2023) 
‘Starry Night: Ekphrasis, Inheritance and 
Constellation’, conference programme 
(abstract), Great Writing International 
Creative Writing Conference, University 
College, London, 15-16 July, pp. 1-25.
Hollander, J. (1988) ‘The Poetics of 
Ekphrasis’, Word & Image, 4(1), pp. 209-
219.
Jay, M. (1994) Downcast Eyes: The 
Denigration of Vision in Twentieth-century 
French Thought. California. University of 
California Press.
Keats, J. (1958) The Letters of John Keats. 
Edited by H.E. Rollins. 2 vols (1). 
Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Kennedy, D. (2012) The Ekphrastic 
Encounter in Contemporary British Poetry 
and Elsewhere. London: Routledge.
Kennedy, D. and R. Meek (eds) (2019) 
Ekphrastic Encounters: New 
Interdisciplinary Essays on Literature and 


── PAGE 9 ──
112 • Writing in Practice vol. 10
Writing in Practice vol. 10 • 113
the Visual Arts. Manchester: Manchester 
University Press. 
Krauss, R.E. (1986) ‘The Originality of 
the Avant-Garde’, The Originality of the 
Avant-Garde and Other Modernist Myths. 
Cambridge, Massachusetts; London, 
England: The MIT Press, pp. 151-170. 
Krieger, M. (1992) Ekphrasis: The Illusion 
of the Natural Sign. Baltimore and 
London: The John Hopkins University 
Press.
Loizeaux, E.B. (2008) Twentieth Century 
Poetry and the Visual Arts. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Lynch, D. (2023) ‘Afterword: The Object 
Lessons of the Virtual Museum’, 
Romanticism on the Net, 80-81, Spring-
Fall, pp. 1-16.
Malevich, K. (1913) Black Square. Tate 
Gallery, London. Available at: https://
www.tate.org.uk/art/artists/kazimir-
malevich-1561/five-ways-look-
malevichs-black-square (Accessed: 11 
June 2024)
Mitchell, W.J.T. (1995) Picture Theory: 
Essays on Verbal and Visual Representation. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Motte, W.F. (ed) (1986) Oulipo: A Primer 
of Potential Literature. Lincoln, Nebraska: 
University of Nebraska Press.
O’Hara, F. (2005) Selected Poems. 
Manchester: Carcanet. 
Oliver, M. (2014) Blue Horses. London: 
Penguin Books.
Perec, G. (2008) Species of Spaces and 
Other Pieces. Translated from the French 
by J. Sturrock. London. Penguin Books.
Petit, P. (2013) What the Water Gave Me: 
Poems After Frieda Kahlo. Bridgend: Seren 
Press. 
Purpura, L. (2007) ‘What is a Lyric 
Essay?: Provisional Responses’, Seneca 
Review, 37(2), p. 97.
Queyras, S. (2010) ‘After Ekphrasis’, 
Poetry Foundation, Saturday, 27 March. 
Available at: https://www.
poetryfoundation.org/harriet-books/
2010/03/after-ekphrasis. (Accessed: 3 
June 2024). 
Raine, C. (1979) A Martian Sends a 
Postcard Home. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Raitt, G. (2006) ‘Ekphrasis and 
Illumination of Painting: The End of the 
Road?’, Word & Image, 22(1), pp. 14-26.
Rees-Jones, D. (2012) Burying the Wren. 
Bridgend: Seren Press.
Simic, C. (2011) Dime-store Alchemy: The 
Art of Joseph Cornell. New York: NYRB 
Classics.
Vuong, O. (2017) Night Sky with Exit 
Wounds. London: Jonathan Cape.
Williams, W.C. (2000) Selected Poems. 
Edited. C. Tomlinson. London: Penguin 
Books. 
Wordsworth, W. (1989 [1801]) Preface to 
the Lyrical Ballads. Lahore: Kitab Mahal, 
pp. 57-73. 
Yoseloff, T. (2011) The City with Horns. 
Norfolk: Salt Publishing. 
Young, K. (2003) To Repel Ghosts. 
Hanover, New Hampshire: Steerforth 
Press. 
List of artworks:
Bruegel, P. (1560) Landscape with the Fall 
of Icarus. Royal Museums of Fine Arts of 
Belgium, Brussels. Available at: https://
artsandculture.google.com/story/
landscape-with-the-fall-of-icarus-royal-
museums-of-fine-arts-of-belgium/
ewUxXpmuNdcLJg?hl=en (Accessed: 11 
June 2024)
Kandinsky, W. (1913) Composition VII. 
Available at: https://www.
wassilykandinsky.net /work-36.php 
(Accessed: 11 June 2024)
Malevich, K. (1913) Black Square. Tate 
Gallery, London. Available at: https://
www.tate.org.uk/art/artists/kazimir-
malevich-1561/five-ways-look-
malevichs-black-square (Accessed: 11 
June 2024)
Mondrian, P. (1921) Lozenge Composition 
with Yellow, Black, Blue, Red, and Gray. 
Available at: https://www.huffpost.
com/entry/post_1036_b_756669 
(Accessed: 11 June 2024)
Rice, A.E. (1918) Portrait of Katherine 
Mansfield. Available at: https://
arthistoryproject.com/artists/anne-
estelle-rice/portrait-of-katherine-
mansfield/ (Accessed: 11 June 2024)
Rothko, M. (1958) Black on Maroon. Tate 
Gallery, London. Available at: https://
www.tate. org.uk/art/artworks/rothko-
black-on-maroon-t01031 (Accessed: 11 
June 2024)
Turner, J.M.W. (1845) Sunrise with Sea 
Monsters. Tate Gallery, London. 
Available at: https://www.tate.org.uk/
art/artworks/turner-sunrise-with-sea-
monsters-n01990 (Accessed: 11 June 
2024)
Whistler, J.M. (1875) Nocturne: Black and 
Gold – The Fire Wheel. Tate Gallery, 
London. Available at: https://www.tate.
org.uk/art/artworks/whistler-nocturne-
black-and-gold-the- fire-wheel-n03419 
(Accessed: 11 June 2024)
Poems previously published:
“Abstraction”, Dark Winter Literary 
Magazine, June, 2022. Available at: 
https://www.darkwinterlit.com/post/
abstraction-a-distant-fawn-night-sea-
journey-by-patrick-wright (Accessed: 11 
June 2024)
“Black Square”, The Ekphrastic Review, 
April 2018. Available at: https://www.
ekphrastic.net/the-ekphrastic-review/
black-square-by-patrick-wright 
(Accessed: 11 June 2024)
“Imaginary Museum”, Romanticism on 
the Net: Materialising Romanticism, Issue 
80-81, Spring/Fall 2023. Available at: 
https://ronjournal.org/articles/n80-81/
introduction-8/ (Accessed: 11 June 2024)
“Nocturne”, The Alchemy Spoon, 
Issue 5, 2021. Available at: https:/
/www.calameo.com/read/
006240328c64bd9e2ee29?
authid=3ogoUhpVZ3L5 
(Accessed: 11 June 2024)
“Portrait of Katherine Mansfield”, The 
High Window, Autumn, 2021. Available 
at: https://thehighwindowpress.com/
2021/09/05/the-high-window-poetry-
issue-23-autumn-2021/
#Patrick%20Wright (Accessed: 11 June 
2024).
